Case Study
Snapshot:
EIGHT YEARS IN PRISON FOR UNLAWFUL LOAN
MODIFICATION AND MONEY LAUNDERING
Conviction
§ 8 years in state
prison
OVERVIEW
§ ordered to pay
$1,568,717 in Between May 2012 and July 2017, Assad Suleiman of Irvine California and co-defendant Kevin Suleiman, engaged
restitution in a sophisticated loan modification scheme operating as Jefferson Legal Group, Los Angeles, California; Simplify
Law Group, Irvine, California; Synergy Law Center, Anaheim, California; and Wilshire Debt Advisors, Irvine
California. The pair and one other conspirator: operated without any lawyers; charged advanced fees for loan
The Case
modifications; lied to victims in order secure more funds based on covering taxes and fraudulent fees; and laundered
§ Grand theft,
money mortgage payments into their fraudulent business accounts.
laundering, and
unlawful loan The participants defrauded a total of 387 victims with a loss of at least $2.28 million.
modification
In California, it is illegal to charge an advance fee for loan modifications. The conspirators advised homeowners to
§ $2.28 million
loss from victims abandon mortgage payments, used the lack of payments to prove to lenders that a loan modification was necessary,
resulting in funds benefits the conspirators. This scheme caused foreclosure proceedings that would have otherwise
been unnecessary.
The scheme went unnoticed because lenders didn’t know about the trial payments and impound fees the
conspirators collected, and homeowners believed their lies until they were faced with foreclosure. The conspirators
deliberately chose business names that implied legal involvement, and when complaints started, they contacted with
victims with a new business name, while the old company disappeared in a financial “hit and run.”
THE CASE
Assad Suleiman plead guilty on July 13, 2018, to the following felony counts: (43) money laundering. (10) grand theft,
(10) second degree burglary, and conspiracy to commit grand theft, money laundering and unlawful loan
modification.
He was convicted and sentenced to 8 years in state prison and ordered to pay $1,568,717 in restitution.
His co-conspirators were also sentenced in separate trials.
Case Study: 2 HR CA-DFPI PE Course Overview The Case Topics Analysis Challenge Your Answers
1
Topics for Case Study Discussion
Considerations
Based on the case
study, keep in
mind:
TOPICS
Processes
The California Department of Financial Protection and Innovation (DFPI) mission is to serve Californians by effectively overseeing
financial service providers, enforcing laws and regulations, promoting fair and honest business practices, enhancing consumer
§ Systems
§ Audits awareness, and protecting consumers by preventing potential marketplace risks, fraud, and abuse. Understanding the DFPI does not
have criminal penalty authority, what role would they have played in the activities that led to the final convictions or the defendants in
this case?
Outcome
§ The DFPI would not have any role in the road to a criminal conviction because they are limited to civil penalties only
§ Victims § The DFPI would only be involved in violations of federal laws that impact state compliance
§ Costs § The DFPI has the authority under the CA Financing law to address violations of both state and federal laws that address the
§ Community residential mortgage industry
impact
§ The DFPI is the highest authority relating to both criminal and civil violations relating to the residential mortgage industry in
California
The law
Feedback:
§ State laws The DFPI enforces residential mortgage laws in CA. It also has the authority under [CA Fin § 50505] to enforce compliance with
§ Federal laws federal laws including The federal Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act, The federal Truth in Lending Act, as amended, and The
federal Home Ownership Equity Protection Act.
When persons violate laws in the residential mortgage industry profit is generally the driving force. For a period, the decision to commit
fraud may seem a wise choice until the perpetrators are caught. Considering the mission of the DFPI and the state criminal enforcement
system, what effects could tough sentences for violators have on someone considering fraud?
§ Persons who commit fraud are probably going to do it anyway and tough sentences are not a deterrent
§ Tough sentences only become a deterrent to prevent a repeat offender
§ Tough sentences adequately communicated to the industry with live case results should be a deterrent to those contemplating
committing fraud
§ Tough sentences for violators are never a deterrent when fraud can be profitable
Feedback:
The way to ensure that tough sentences become a deterrent to those considering mortgage fraud is to ensure that violators are
exposed and effectively advertised to the industry showing the consequences of those fraudulent actions
Case Study: 2 HR CA-DFPI PE Course Overview The Case Topics Analysis Challenge Your Answers
2
This case involves fraud related to loan modifications. Both federal and state law prohibits non-attorneys from
accepting payments before a plan by the lender has been presented and also prohibits encouraging default which is
suggesting that a consumer not make a scheduled payment. Both of these prohibited acts were violated in this case.
Which of the following answers best describes the violations of the prohibited acts?
§ The defendants violated [CA Fin § 50202]
§ The defendants violated [CA Fin § 50205]
§ The defendants violated both [CA Fin § 50202] and [CA Fin § 50205]
§ The defendants violated the CA Fin laws in general and were subject to class A and B penalties
Feedback:
Criminal penalties are categorized as class A and B and are added to any civil penalties that have been placed on the
defendants.
SOURCE
California Real Estate Fraud Report
https://www.californiarealestatefraudreport.com/archives/category/foreclosure-fraud/page/2
Case Study: 2 HR CA-DFPI PE Course Overview The Case Topics Analysis Challenge Your Answers
3
