Case Study
Snapshot:
Customer Alleges Creative Financing

The Case THE CASE
▪ Occupancy
Mark Spencer, a mortgage loan originator, originated a loan for Jason Williams. Jason received favorable rates and
fraud
terms for financing an owner-occupied residence. Mark has been notified six months after the initial loan closed
▪ Mortgage fraud
that a random audit of the residence occupants uncovered that the home was never occupied by Jason, but had
been rented the day after closing. During the inspection, the renters informed the auditor they had already given
notice to move at the end of the month. Post a response to the discussion questions based on the information
Players
presented in this module and the Terms and Definitions document.
▪ A licensed
mortgage loan EXPECTATIONS
originator
Students are expected to respond to at least one (1) other class participant’s posting on the Discussion board within the
▪ A customer who
may have Learning Management System. Taking a few minutes to write a response prior to posting your comments is
concealed his recommended. If no other student has posted at the time of the student’s post, return at a later time to review and add
true intent of his
your comments.
purchase
Posting a substantive response to all written assignments is a requirement for this course. Students must display
meaningful dialogue that demonstrates they are fully engaged with the material and have a point of view that contributes
to active discourse surrounding each discussion topic. One word or only a few words response is unacceptable. Students
are expected to apply higher level thinking to formulate thoughtful responses that go beyond the course material. Refer
to the Terms and Definitions resource document under the Resource tab to assist with your responses.
All assignments must be completed in the allotted time for the course. Check the beginning and ending dates for each
course. It is your responsibility to know when assignments are due and the timeframe for completion. The instructor
reserves the right to reject a response or request additional commentary if the response provided is deemed inadequate.
Participation in all discussion/written assignments is mandatory to receive a satisfactory completion grade for this course.
.
Case Study: 1 HR SC CE Course Overview The Case Topics Analysis Challenge Your Answers
Questions for Case Study
Considerations
Based on the case
study, keep in
mind:

Processes
1. Jason Williams believes this is a case of creative financing. Comment on his belief based on what you have
▪ Systems
▪ Audits learned about this activity.
▪ Safeguards
Outcome
2. If the lender determines they relied on false information as a basis for providing loan approval, what are the
▪ Victims
lender’s options?
▪ Costs
▪ Community
impact
3. What document did Jason execute that would give the lender authority to pursue the most extreme option
The law
available?
▪ State laws
▪ Federal laws
INSTRUCTIONS
Return to the Discussion board to post your responses to the questions and to comment on at least one other
student’s post. Leverage the Terms and Definitions document when preparing your response.
Case Study: 1 HR SC CE Course Overview The Case Topics Analysis Challenge Your Answers
