Case Study
Snapshot:
Possible Discrimination Against Moderate-Income
Borrowers

The Case
▪ ECOA THE CASE
Compliance
A mortgage company completed an internal audit of its ECOA compliance policy. An outcome of an interview with
▪ ECOA violation
the marketing department reveals an advertising strategy that targets clients who reside outside the business
▪ FH Act violation
community location. Significantly higher income levels and appreciating home values are the basis for this
targeted approach. The community surrounding the business is comprised of primarily moderate-income minority
residents with lower home values and income levels as compared to the targeted neighborhood.
Players
EXPECTATIONS
▪ Marketing
Department
Students are expected to respond to at least one (1) other class participant’s posting on the Discussion board within the
▪ Moderate-
Learning Management System. Taking a few minutes to write a response prior to posting your comments is
income
homeowners recommended. If no other student has posted at the time of the student’s post, return at a later time to review and add
your comments.
Posting a substantive response to all written assignments is a requirement for this course. Students must display
meaningful dialogue that demonstrates they are fully engaged with the material and have a point of view that contributes
to active discourse surrounding each discussion topic. One word or only a few words response is unacceptable. Students
are expected to apply higher level thinking to formulate thoughtful responses that go beyond the course material.
All assignments must be completed in the allotted time for the course. Check the beginning and ending dates for each
course. It is your responsibility to know when assignments are due and the timeframe for completion. The instructor
reserves the right to reject a response or request additional commentary if the response provided is deemed inadequate.
Participation in all discussion/written assignments is mandatory to receive a satisfactory completion grade for this course.
.
Case Study: 1 HR SC CE Course Overview The Case Topics Analysis Challenge Your Answers
Questions for Case Study
Considerations
Based on the case
study, keep in
mind:

Processes
A response using the information obtained in the ECOA, FH ACT and HMDA sections to answer the questions. Minimum 25
▪ Systems
▪ Audits words per question.
▪ Safeguards
1. Is the company violating any prohibited practices under ECOA? Refer to specific prohibited practices under the law and
required MLO behavior.
Outcome
▪ Victims
▪ Costs 2. Is there an argument for suggesting that the company is practicing redlining?
▪ Community
impact
3. What actions should the company immediately implement to address this issue?
The law
▪ State laws 4. How would the LAR under HMDA disclose the potential results of the company's advertising policies?
▪ Federal laws
INSTRUCTIONS
Return to the Discussion board to post your responses to the questions and to comment on at least one other
student’s post.
Case Study: 1 HR SC CE Course Overview The Case Topics Analysis Challenge Your Answers
