1
Edition v.111517 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Violations of the law can have significant penalties. An example of the consequences of violating the law is the
GLBA were the penalties are quite severe:
▪ A financial institution can be fined up to $100,000 for each violation
▪ The officers and directors of the financial institution can be fined up to $10,000 for each
violation
▪ Criminal penalties include imprisonment for up to 5 years, a fine, or both
▪ If the GLBA is violated at the same time that another federal law is violated, or if the GLBA is
violated as part of a pattern of any illegal activity involving more than $100,000 within a 12-
month period, the violator's fine will be doubled and he or she will be imprisoned for up to 10
years
Prohibited Acts
Redlining - Both the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and The Fair Housing Act address redlining. A credit worthy
consumer has the right to access to credit. Redlining is the practice of lenders deciding not to lend in a
particular community because that community may have a reputation of high foreclosures or a high percentage
of credit challenged borrowers. The problem with redlining that community is that a credit worthy individual
living in that community would be denied access to credit because it is not being made available. A lender is
allowed to make a credit decision on the individual profile of a borrower, however, it is prohibited to make
decisions on geographic locations.
RESPA Prohibited Practices
Affiliated Business Arrangements - RESPA requires the disclosure of a conflicting relationship. There are two conditions
that require the ABA disclosure:
▪ Ownership of greater than one percent in a company that is referring business to another company
▪ An associate relationship where business dealing between the parties is not independent or “arms
length”. Relatives, business affiliates etc. are required to disclose those relationships.
▪ RESPA prohibits a sham business relationship intended to avoid the legal requirements of disclosure for
ownership and associate relationships
2
RESPA Section 8 RESPA section 8 is intended to protect the consumer from excessive fees which often result
from kickbacks and payment for non-service activities. It prohibits the payment for referrals between settlement
service providers.
RESPA Section 8 Violations - Prohibition Against Kickbacks & Unearned Fees
Source: 12 CFR 1024.14 – RESPA Section 8
The following outlines violations of Section 8.
No referral fees
1. No person may give, and no person may accept any fee, kickback or other thing of value
pursuant to any agreement or understanding, oral or otherwise; incident to or part of a
settlement service involving a federally-related mortgage loan. Any referral of a settlement
service is not a compensable service.
2. A business entity (whether or not in an affiliate relationship) may not pay any other business
entity or the employees of any other business entity for the referral of settlement service
business.
3. The term payment is synonymous with the giving or receiving any "thing of value,'' and does not
require transfer of money
4. No split charges except for actual services performed.
5. A charge by a person for which no or nominal services are performed, or for which duplicate
fees are charged is an unearned fee and violates RESPA section 8.
6. The source of the payment does not determine whether or not a service is compensable.
Thing of Value
Anything of value includes, without limitation, monies, things, discounts, salaries, commissions, fees, duplicate
payments of a charge, stock, dividends, distributions of partnership profits, franchise royalties, credits
representing monies that may be paid at a future date, the opportunity to participate in a money-making
program, retained or increased earnings, increased equity in a parent or subsidiary entity, special bank deposits
or accounts, special or unusual banking terms, services of all types at special or free rates, sales or rentals at
special prices or rates, lease or rental payments based in whole or in part on the amount of business referred,
trips and payment of another person's expenses, or reduction in credit against an existing obligation.
Agreement or Understanding
An agreement or understanding for the referral of business incident to, or part of a settlement service, need
not be written or verbalized but may be established by a practice, pattern or course of conduct. When a thing
of value is received repeatedly and is connected in any way with the volume or value of the business referred,
the receipt of the thing of value is evidence that it is made pursuant to an agreement or understanding for the
referral of business.
3
High Prices
CFPB may investigate high prices to determine if they are the result of a referral fee or a split of a fee. If the
payment of a thing of value bears no reasonable relationship to the market value of the goods or services
provided, then the excess is not for services or goods actually performed or provided. These facts may be used
as evidence of a violation of Section 8 and may serve as a basis for a RESPA investigation.
Multiple Services
When a person able to refer settlement service business, such as an attorney, mortgage lender, real estate
broker or agent, or developer or builder, receives a payment for providing additional settlement services as
part of a real estate transaction, such payment must be for services that are actual, necessary and distinct from
the primary services provided by such person.
RESPA Section 8 Permits
Permits payment of referral under certain circumstances:
▪ An employer's payment to his or her own employees for any referral activities.
Scenarios Reflecting Section 8
Illustrations of Requirements of RESPA- Reference Appendix B Part 12 CFR 1024
The following illustrations provide additional guidance on the meaning and coverage of the provisions of
RESPA. Other provisions of federal or state law may also be applicable to the practices and payments discussed
in the following illustrations.
1. Facts: A, a provider of settlement services, provides settlement services at abnormally low rates or at
no charge at all to B, a builder, in connection with a subdivision being developed by B. B agrees to refer
purchasers of the completed homes in the subdivision to A for the purchase of settlement services in
connection with the sale of individual lots by B.
Comments: The rendering of services by A to B at little or no charge constitutes a thing of value given by
A to B in return for the referral of settlement services business. Both A and B are in violation of Section 8
of RESPA.
2. Facts: B, a lender, encourages persons who receive federally-related mortgage loans from it to employ
A, an attorney, to perform title searches and related settlement services in connection with their
transaction. B and A have an understanding that, in return for the referral of this business, A provides
legal services to B or B's officers or employees at abnormally low rates or for no charge.
Comments: Both A and B are in violation of Section 8 of RESPA. Similarly, if an attorney gives a portion of his or
her fees to another attorney, a lender, a real estate broker or any other provider of settlement services who had
referred prospective clients to the attorney, Section 8 would be violated by both persons.
4
Requests for Personal Information
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act prohibit a lender from making a credit decision
based on a number of prohibited factors. For that reason, lenders are not supposed to ask questions of
personal information that would violate that provision. An example of prohibited requests for personal
information would be:
▪ Asking a borrower if they receive child support without disclosing to them that they are not required to
disclose the information if they do not intend to use it for qualifying purposes
▪ Asking about a person’s religion
▪ Asking about family planning or child bearing
The exception to asking about personal information is for government monitoring purposes. The Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) wants to ensure that lenders are meeting the needs of their communities and
not practicing discrimination in their lending practices. To ensure that is happening, HMDA requires lenders to
collect information relating to ethnicity, race and sex to determine if there is a pattern of discrimination. Even,
though this data is collected it is a prohibited act to make a credit decision based on the information.
Prohibited and acceptable practices for loan processors
Loan processors who claim an exemption from licensing under the SAFE Act are required to:
▪ Be employees
▪ Paid on a W2 basis
▪ Work under the supervision of a registered and or licensed mortgage loan originator
▪ Perform only clerical or administrative duties
Loan processors who claim an exemption from licensing under the SAFE Act are prohibited from:
▪ Taking loan applications
▪ Negotiating rates and terms
▪ Representing to the public that they in any way are in the business of loan origination
Independent Contract loan processors
▪ Must maintain a unique identifier number with the NMLS
▪ Must be licensed as a mortgage loan originator
5
6
Edition v.122817 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
During November 2012, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), in partnership with the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC), issued a warning letter to approximately a dozen mortgage lenders and mortgage brokers advising
them to clean up potentially misleading advertisements, particularly those targeted toward veterans and older
Americans. The CFPB also announced it had begun formal investigations of six companies that it thinks may have
committed more serious violations of the law.
“Misrepresentations in mortgage products can deprive consumers of important information while making one of the
biggest financial decisions of their lives,” said CFPB Director Richard Cordray. “Baiting consumers with false ads to buy
into mortgage products would be illegal. We will conduct a fair and rigorous investigation into these issues and will take
appropriate action for any violations we find.”
The basis of this stemmed from a joint “sweep,” a review conducted by the CFPB and the FTC of about 800 randomly
selected mortgage-related ads across the country, including ads for mortgage loans, refinancing, and reverse mortgages.
The agencies looked at public-facing ads in newspapers, on the Internet, and from mail solicitations; some came to the
attention of the CFPB and the FTC from consumers who complained about them.
Back in 2012, the CFPB and the FTC were looking for potential violations of the 2011 Mortgage Acts and Practices
Advertising Rule, which prohibits misleading claims concerning government affiliation, interest rates, fees, costs,
payments associated with the loan, and the amount of cash or credit available to the consumer. The CFPB and the FTC
share enforcement authority for the rule. Companies that the CFPB finds have violated prohibitions on misleading
advertising could be subject to enforcement actions.
The CFPB’s review generally focused on mortgage advertisements, particularly ads that targeted older Americans or
veterans. The FTC, meanwhile, examined ads by home builders, realtors, and lead generators.
The sweep identified problems, such as:
▪ Potential misrepresentations about government affiliation:
For example, some of the ads for mortgage products contained official-looking seals or logos, or had other
characteristics that could be interpreted by consumers as indicating a government affiliation.
▪ Potentially inaccurate information about interest rates:
For example, some ads promoted low rates that may have misled consumers about the terms of the product
actually offered.
▪ Potentially misleading statements concerning the costs of reverse mortgages:
For example, some ads for reverse mortgage products claimed that a consumer will have no payments in
connection with the product, even though consumers with a reverse mortgage are commonly required to
continue to make monthly or other periodic tax or insurance payments, and may risk default if the payments
aren’t made.
▪ Potential misrepresentations about the amount of cash or credit available to a consumer: For example, some
ads contained a mock check and/or suggested that a consumer has been pre-approved to receive a certain
amount of money in connection with refinancing their mortgage or taking out a reverse mortgage, when a
number of additional steps would customarily need to be completed before the consumer would qualify for the
loan.
7
There are multiple laws that regulate the advertising and marketing requirements for the residential mortgage
industry. These laws have been addressed in previous sections of this text. For purposes of this segment, we
will review the individual laws as they relate to advertising and marketing requirements. The laws that will be
addressed are:
▪ The Truth-in-Lending Act (TILA)
▪ The Mortgage Acts and Practices Rule (MAP)
General advertising requirements for the Truth-in-Lending Act
▪ Advertisements for specific credit terms that are actually available or will be arranged or offered
▪ Disclosures must be clear and conspicuous, for example, favorable loan terms may not be more
conspicuous than less favorable terms associated with the same loan product being promoted. This
applies to all media. Print, internet and television media should not reflect smaller print for less
favorable items, graphics should not obscure the unfavorable items and voice related ads should not
have speeds of delivery that are not easily understood.
▪ An advertisement made through television or radio stating any of the terms requiring additional
disclosures under this section may alternatively comply with the requirements by stating the
information required as applicable, and listing a toll-free telephone number along with a reference that
such number may be used by consumers to obtain the additional cost information
▪ Triggering terms in advertising are terms that when used require additional disclosures.
There are different rules for Open-End and Closed-End loans.
8
Rules for Open-End (HELOC) advertising
Triggering terms requiring additional disclosures
• Finance charge
• Other charges
Additional disclosure
▪ Any loan fee that is a percentage of the credit limit under the plan
▪ An estimate of any other fees imposed for opening the plan, stated as a single dollar amount
▪ Any periodic rate used to compute the finance charge, expressed as an annual percentage rate
▪ The maximum annual percentage rate that may be imposed in a variable-rate plan
Triggering term: Balloon Payment
If an advertisement contains a statement of any minimum periodic payment and that a balloon payment may
result if only the minimum periodic payments are made, even if such a payment is uncertain or unlikely, the
advertisement also is required to state with equal prominence and in close proximity to the minimum periodic
payment statement that:
▪ A balloon payment may result, if applicable.
▪ A balloon payment results if paying the minimum periodic payments does not fully amortize the
outstanding balance by a specified date or time, and the consumer is required to repay the entire
outstanding balance at such time.
▪ The amount and timing of the balloon payment that will result if the consumer makes only the
minimum payments for the maximum period of time that the consumer is permitted to make such
payments.
Triggering term: Tax Implications
▪ An advertisement that states that any interest expense incurred under the home-equity plan is or may
be tax deductible may not be misleading in this regard. If an advertisement distributed in paper form or
through the Internet (rather than by radio or television) is for a home-equity plan secured by the
consumer's principal dwelling, and the advertisement states that the advertised extension of credit may
exceed the fair market value of the dwelling, the advertisement shall clearly and conspicuously state
that:
o The interest on the portion of the credit extension that is greater than the fair market value of
the dwelling is not tax deductible for Federal income tax purposes; and
o The consumer should consult a tax adviser for further information regarding the deductibility of
interest and charges.
9
Misleading Terms
An advertisement may not refer to a home-equity plan as “free money” or contain a similarly misleading term.
Triggering terms:
▪ Promotional Rates
▪ Payments, and Periods must also include:
Promotional rate in a variable-rate plan
Any annual percentage rate that is not based on the index and margin that will be used to make rate
adjustments under the plan, if that rate is less than a reasonably current annual percentage rate that would be
in effect under the index and margin that will be used to make rate adjustments under the plan.
Promotional payment in a variable rate plan
▪ Any minimum payment applicable for a promotional period that is not derived by applying the index
and margin to the outstanding balance when such index and margin will be used to determine other
minimum payments under the plan.
▪ Is less than other minimum payments under the plan derived by applying a reasonably current index
and margin that will be used to determine the amount of such payments using an assumed balance.
Promotional period
If any annual percentage rate that may be applied to a plan is a promotional rate, or if any payment applicable
to a plan is a promotional payment, the following must be disclosed in any advertisement, other than television
or radio advertisements, in a clear and conspicuous manner with equal prominence and in close proximity to
each listing of the promotional rate or payment:
▪ The period of time during which the promotional rate or promotional payment will apply
Rules for Closed-end Advertising
Triggering Terms
▪ The amount or percentage of any down payment
▪ The number of payments or period of repayment
▪ The amount of any payment
▪ The amount of any finance charge
Additional disclosure requirements for items listed above:
▪ The amount or percentage of the down payment
▪ Terms of repayment over the entire period of the loan
▪ The APR and if it can increase after consummation
10
Prohibited Acts and Practices
Prohibited acts or practices in advertisements for credit secured by a dwelling. 1026.24 (i)
The following acts or practices under Regulation Z are prohibited in advertisements for credit secured by a
dwelling:
Misleading Advertising of “Fixed” Rates and Payments
Using the word “fixed” to refer to rates, payments, or the credit transaction in an advertisement for variable-
rate transactions or other transactions where the payment will increase, unless:
(1) In the case of an advertisement solely for one or more variable-rate transactions, the phrase
“Adjustable-Rate Mortgage,” “Variable-Rate Mortgage,” or “ARM” appears in the advertisement before
the first use of the word “fixed” and is at least as conspicuous as any use of the word “fixed” in the
advertisement.
(2) Each use of the word “fixed” to refer to a rate or payment is accompanied by an equally prominent and
closely proximate statement of the time period for which the rate or payment is fixed, and the fact that
the rate may vary or the payment may increase after that period.
(3) In the case of an advertisement solely for non-variable-rate transactions where the payment will
increase (e.g., a stepped-rate mortgage transaction with an initial lower payment), each use of the word
“fixed” to refer to the payment is accompanied by an equally prominent and closely proximate
statement of the time period for which the payment is fixed, and the fact that the payment will increase
after that period.
(4) In the case of an advertisement for both variable-rate transactions and non-variable-rate transactions,
the phrase “Adjustable-Rate Mortgage,” “Variable-Rate Mortgage,” or “ARM” appears in the
advertisement with equal prominence as any use of the term “fixed,” “Fixed-Rate Mortgage,” or similar
terms.
Misleading Comparisons in Advertisements
Making any comparison in an advertisement between actual or hypothetical credit payments or rates and any
payment or simple annual rate that will be available under the advertised product for a period less than the full
term of the loan, unless:
(1) In general, the advertisement includes a clear and conspicuous comparison to the information required
to be disclosed.
(2) If the advertisement is for a variable-rate transaction, and the advertised payment or simple annual rate
is based on the index and margin that will be used to make subsequent rate or payment adjustments
over the term of the loan, the advertisement includes an equally prominent statement in close
proximity to the payment or rate that the payment or rate is subject to adjustment and the time period
when the first adjustment will occur.
Misrepresentations about Government Endorsement
Making any statement in an advertisement that the product offered is a “government loan program”,
“government-supported loan”, or is otherwise endorsed or sponsored by any Federal, state, or local
government entity, unless the advertisement is for an FHA loan, VA loan, or similar loan program that is, in fact,
endorsed or sponsored by a Federal, state, or local government entity.
11
Misleading Use of the Current Lender’s Name
Using the name of the consumer's current lender in an advertisement that is not sent by or on behalf of the
consumer's current lender, unless the advertisement:
(1) Discloses with equal prominence the name of the person or creditor making the advertisement; and
(2) Includes a clear and conspicuous statement that the person making the advertisement is not associated
with, or acting on behalf of, the consumer's current lender.
Misleading Claims of Debt Elimination
Making any misleading claim in an advertisement that the mortgage product offered will eliminate debt or
result in a waiver or forgiveness of a consumer's existing loan terms with, or obligations to, another creditor.
Misleading Use of the Term “Counselor”
Using the term “counselor” in an advertisement to refer to a for-profit mortgage broker or mortgage creditor,
its employees, or persons working for the broker or creditor that are involved in offering, originating or selling
mortgages
Misleading Foreign Language Advertisements
Providing information about some trigger terms or required disclosures, such as an initial rate or payment, only
in a foreign language in an advertisement, but providing information about other trigger terms or required
disclosures, such as information about the fully-indexed rate or fully amortizing payment, only in English in the
same advertisement.
12
Prohibited Acts and Practices
Advertising practices under the Mortgage Acts and Practices Act (MAP)
MAP was created to address deceptive advertising practices for non-depository institutions such as mortgage
companies and any entity that engages in mortgage advertising. It relates to any form of commercial
communication. It is a violation for any person to make any material misrepresentation, expressly or by
implication, in any commercial communication, regarding any term of any mortgage credit product, including
but not limited to misrepresentations about:
Interest Misrepresentation
The interest charged for the mortgage credit product, including but not limited to misrepresentations
concerning:
(1) The amount of interest that the consumer owes each month that is included in the consumer's
payments, loan amount, or total amount due, or
(2) Whether the difference between the interest owed and the interest paid is added to the total amount
due from the consumer
Misrepresentation of Interest rates
The annual percentage rate, simple annual rate, periodic rate, or any other rate
Misrepresentation of fees
The existence, nature, or amount of fees or costs to the consumer associated with the mortgage credit
product, including but not limited to misrepresentations that no fees are charged
Misrepresentation of terms
The existence, cost, payment terms, or other terms associated with any additional product or feature that is or
may be sold in conjunction with the mortgage credit product, including but not limited to credit insurance or
credit disability insurance
Misrepresentation of taxes and insurance
The terms, amounts, payments, or other requirements relating to taxes or insurance associated with the
mortgage credit product, including but not limited to misrepresentations about:
(1) Whether separate payment of taxes or insurance is required; or
(2) The extent to which payment for taxes or insurance is included in the loan payments, loan amount, or
total amount due from the consumer
Misrepresentation of prepayment penalty
Any prepayment penalty associated with the mortgage credit product, including but not limited to
misrepresentations concerning the existence, nature, amount, or terms of such penalty
13
Misrepresentation of ARMS and the use of the word “fixed”
The variability of interest, payments, or other terms of the mortgage credit product, including but not limited
to misrepresentations using the word “fixed”
Misrepresentation of comparisons
▪ Any comparison between:
(1) Any rate or payment that will be available for a period less than the full length of the mortgage credit
product; and
(2) Any actual or hypothetical rate or payment
▪ The type of mortgage credit product, including but not limited to misrepresentations that the product is or
involves a fully amortizing mortgage
▪ The amount of the obligation, or the existence, nature, or amount of cash or credit available to the
consumer in connection with the mortgage credit product, including but not limited to misrepresentations
that the consumer will receive a certain amount of cash or credit as part of a mortgage credit transaction
Misrepresentation of payments including reverse mortgages
▪ The existence, number, amount, or timing of any minimum or required payments, including but not limited
to misrepresentations about any payments or that no payments are required in a reverse mortgage or
other mortgage credit product
Misrepresentation about potential for default
▪ The potential for default under the mortgage credit product, including but not limited to
misrepresentations concerning the circumstances under which the consumer could default for nonpayment
of taxes, insurance, or maintenance, or for failure to meet other obligations
Misrepresentation relating to the mortgage product
▪ The effectiveness of the mortgage credit product in helping the consumer resolve difficulties in paying
debts, including but not limited to misrepresentations that any mortgage credit product can reduce,
eliminate, or restructure debt or result in a waiver or forgiveness, in whole or in part, of the consumer's
existing obligation with any person
14
Misrepresentation of affiliation
▪ The association of the mortgage credit product or any provider of such product with any other person or
program, including but not limited to misrepresentations that:
(1) The provider is, or is affiliated with, any governmental entity or other organization; or
(2) The product is or relates to a government benefit, or is endorsed, sponsored by, or affiliated with any
government or other program, including but not limited to through the use of formats, symbols, or
logos that resemble those of such entity, organization, or program
Misrepresentation about the current lender
▪ The source of any commercial communication, including but not limited to misrepresentations that a
commercial communication is made by or on behalf of the consumer's current mortgage lender or servicer
Misrepresentation relating to residing in a dwelling
▪ The right of the consumer to reside in the dwelling that is the subject of the mortgage credit product, or the
duration of such right, including but not limited to misrepresentations concerning how long or under what
conditions a consumer with a reverse mortgage can stay in the dwelling
Misrepresentation relating to approval status
▪ The consumer's ability or likelihood to obtain any mortgage credit product or term, including but not
limited to misrepresentations concerning whether the consumer has been preapproved or guaranteed for
any such product or term
Misrepresentation relating to refinancing and loan modification
▪ The consumer's ability or likelihood to obtain a refinancing or modification of any mortgage credit product
or term, including but not limited to misrepresentations concerning whether the consumer has been
preapproved or guaranteed for any such refinancing or modification
Misrepresentation of counseling services
▪ The availability, nature, or substance of counseling services or any other expert advice offered to the
consumer regarding any mortgage credit product or term, including but not limited to the qualifications of
those offering the services or advice
Waiver Not Permitted
It is a violation for any person to obtain, or attempt to obtain, a waiver from any consumer of any protection
provided by or any right of the consumer.
15
Predatory Lending and Steering
Under TILA, Regulation Z, an entity must confirm that, in connection with a consumer credit transaction
secured by a dwelling, a loan originator does not direct or “steer” a consumer to consummate a transaction
based on the fact that the originator will receive greater compensation from the creditor in that transaction
than in other transactions the originator offered or could have offered to the consumer, unless the
consummated transaction is in the consumer’s interest (12 CFR 1026.36(e)(1)).
The rule provides a safe harbor to facilitate compliance with the prohibition on steering. The loan originator is
deemed to comply with the anti-steering prohibition if the consumer is presented with loan options that meet
specific conditions for each type of transaction in which the consumer expressed an interest.
Steering Analysis
An institution that offers a variety of lending products or product features, either through one channel or
through multiple channels, may benefit consumers by offering greater choices and meeting the diverse needs
of applicants. Greater product offerings and multiple channels, however, may also create a fair lending risk
that applicants will be illegally steered to certain choices based on prohibited characteristics. Several examples
illustrate potential fair lending risk:
▪ An institution that offers different lending products based on credit risk levels may present
opportunities for loan originators or brokers to illegally steer applicants to the higher-risk products.
▪ An institution that offers nontraditional loan products or loan products with potentially onerous terms
(such as prepayment penalties) may present opportunities for loan originators or brokers to illegally
steer applicants to certain products or features.
▪ An institution that offers prime or sub-prime products through different channels may present
opportunities for applicants to be illegally steered to the sub-prime channel. The distinction between
guiding consumers toward a specific product or feature and illegal steering centers on whether the
institution did so on a prohibited basis, rather than based on an applicant’s needs or other legitimate
factors. It is not necessary to demonstrate financial harm to a group that has been “steered.” It is
enough to demonstrate that action was taken on a prohibited basis regardless of the ultimate financial
outcome.
16
Prohibition on Steering
Determine that, in connection with a consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling, a loan originator does
not direct or “steer” a consumer to consummate a transaction based on the fact that the originator will receive
greater compensation from the creditor in that transaction than in other transactions the originator offered or
could have offered to the consumer, unless the consummated transaction is in the consumer’s interest.
NOTE: The rule provides a safe harbor to facilitate compliance with the prohibition on steering in regulation 12
CFR 1026.36(e)(1). The loan originator is deemed to comply with the anti-steering prohibition if the consumer
is presented with loan options that meet all of the following conditions for each type of transaction in which
the consumer expressed an interest:
1. The loan originator obtains loan options from a significant number of the creditors with which the
originator regularly does business and, for each type of transaction in which the consumer expressed an
interest, presents the consumer with loan options that include:
i. The loan with the lowest interest rate;
ii. The loan with the lowest interest rate without negative amortization, a prepayment penalty,
interest-only payments, a balloon payment in the first seven years of the life of the loan, a
demand feature, shared equity, or shared appreciation; or, in the case of a reverse mortgage, a
loan without a prepayment penalty, or shared equity or shared appreciation; and
iii. The loan with the lowest total dollar amount for origination points or fees and discount points.
2. The loan originator has a good faith belief that the options (presented to the consumer that are set
forth, above) are loans for which the consumer likely qualifies.
For each type of transaction, if the originator presents to the consumer more than three loans, the originator
highlights the loans that satisfy options 1.i, 1.ii, and 1.iii above.
17
18
Edition v.111517 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Mortgage Fraud
Mortgage Fraud Fraud in the mortgage industry has resulted in billions of dollars in losses to both the industry and to
consumers who depend on mortgage professionals to obtain financing. Each year, the FBI reports on so-called suspicious
activity reports (SAR). The Financial Crime Enforcement Network (FinCEN) uses SARs as vehicles to track the level of
fraud. Every mortgage professional has a responsibility to report any suspicious activity through a mandatory program
that every company must have in place to report SARs. Below are important definitions a MLO should know.
Common Fraud Terms Defined
Air Loan Exists when there is a straw buyer and straw seller making the complete transaction
fraudulent and fictitious.
Churning Excessive selling/lending activity for the purpose of generating fees and commissions. In
some cases, the lender steps the rate down through multiple refinances. Each refinance
is only to a slightly lower rate until the pre-arranged rate is reached.
Chunking Chunking occurs when a third party convinces an uninformed borrower to invest in a
property (or properties), with no money down and with the third party acting as the
borrower’s agent. The third party is also typically the owner of the property or part of a
larger group organizing the scheme. Without the borrower’s knowledge, the third party
submits loan applications to multiple financial institutions for various properties. The
third party retains the loan proceeds, leaving the borrower with multiple loans that
cannot be repaid. The financial institutions are forced to foreclose on the properties
Collusion An agreement, usually secretive, which occurs between two or more persons to deceive,
mislead, or defraud others of their legal rights, or to obtain an objective forbidden by law,
typically involving fraud or gaining an unfair advantage.
Credit Report Fraud Alert A notation at the bottom of a credit report indicating that some items of identification,
i.e., Social Security number, address, etc., are associated with past fraudulent activities.
For example, an address may be flagged because the previous occupant allegedly used
the property for financial misbehavior. Each credit reporting agency has different names
for these alerts: TransUnion – HAWK Alerts, Experian – Fraud Shield, and Equifax –
Safescan.
Lapping A fraud that involves stealing one customer’s payment and then crediting that customer’s
account with a subsequent payment.
Mortgage Fraud A knowing misrepresentation of the truth or concealment of a material fact in a
mortgage loan application to induce another to approve the granting of a mortgage loan.
For the purposes of this text, mortgage fraud refers solely to fraudulent schemes
pertaining to residential mortgage loans.
Nominee Loan A loan made to one individual in which the proceeds of the loan benefit another
individual without the knowledge of the lender.
SARs Suspicious Activity Reports are vehicles utilized by the Financial Crime Enforcement
(FinCEN) to track the level of fraud. Every mortgage professional has a responsibility to
report suspicious activity through a mandatory program that every company must have in
place.
Straw Buyers A person used to buy property in order to conceal the actual owner. The straw buyer
does not intend to occupy the property or make payments and often deeds the property
to the other individual immediately after closing. The straw buyer is usually compensated
for use of his identity. Stated Income/Stated Asset Abuse-Often called the “liar loan.”
When borrowers cannot qualify for a loan using actual income and assets, loans are
converted to SISA program. The result is that borrowers are put into homes that are not
affordable and eventually lose the home and any equity.
19
“Mortgage fraud hurts borrowers, financial institutions, and legitimate homeowners,” said Assistant Director Kevin
Perkins, FBI Criminal Investigative Division. “The FBI, in conjunction with our law enforcement, regulatory, and industry
partners, continues to diligently pursue perpetrators of mortgage fraud schemes.”
Fraudulent activity is still concentrated in the old schemes including property flipping, builder-bailouts, short sales and
foreclosure rescues. Some of the new schemes identified were in the areas of reverse mortgage fraud, credit
enhancements, condo conversion, loan modifications and pump and pay. The entire report is available at www.fbi.gov.
This course will review fraudulent activities that impact the residential mortgage industry. Fraud in the mortgage
industry is generally divided into two broad categories: fraud for housing and fraud for profit.
Fraud for Housing and Fraud for Profit
(a) Fraud for housing generally involves material representation or omission of information with the intent to
deceive or mislead a lender to extend credit that would likely not be offered if the true facts were known.
(b) Fraud for housing is generally committed by home buyers attempting to purchase homes for their personal use.
Participants and Fraud for Housing Schemes:
▪ Participants
(1) Borrower and Co-Borrower
(2) Borrower’s family members
▪ Fraud for housing schemes
(1) Misrepresented income
o False/forged employment verifications
o False/forged tax returns, pay stubs or W-2s
(2) Misrepresented Assets
o False/forged bank statements
o Undisclosed second mortgage
o Loan represented as a gift
▪ Occupancy Fraud
▪ Misrepresented intent to occupy
Fraud for Profit
(a) The motivation behind fraud for profit is money.
(b) Fraud for profit involves the same misuse of information as fraud for housing. There is a deliberate attempt to
deceive or mislead the lender into extending credit that the lender would not have likely offered if the true
facts were known. However, in this case, the perpetrators abscond with the proceeds of the loan, with little or
no intention to purchase or occupy the house.
(c) Fraud for profit is often committed with the complicity of industry insiders such as mortgage brokers, real
estate agents, property appraisers and settlement agents (attorneys and title examiners).
20
Common Mortgage Fraud Schemes
Schemes represent the big picture or secret plan of action used to perpetrate a fraud. There are a variety of “schemes”
prevalent in mortgage fraud scams. These schemes can involve individuals inside the financial institution or third parties.
Various combinations of these schemes may be implemented in a single fraud.
Understand Common Mortgage Schemes
The mortgage professional should have a complete understanding of mortgage schemes that plague the industry.
Understanding the mortgage schemes and definitions should be as familiar as the alphabet to the mortgage professional.
In addition, as the environment changes, new schemes may appear. It is essential that the mortgage professional utilizes
resources and training vehicles to remain current with new mortgage schemes. The descriptions provided below are
examples of traditional and emerging schemes that are used to facilitate mortgage fraud.
Builder Bailout
This scheme is used when a builder, who has unsold units in a tract, subdivision, or condominium complex, employs
various fraudulent schemes to sell the remaining properties.
Buy and Bail
This scheme typically involves a borrower who is current on a mortgage loan, but the value of the house has fallen below
the amount owed. The borrower continues to make loan payments, while applying for a purchase money mortgage loan
on a similar house that costs less due to the decline in market value. After obtaining the new property, the borrower
“walks” or “bails” on the first loan.
Double Selling
Double selling occurs when a mortgage loan originator accepts a legitimate application and documentation from a buyer,
reproduces or copies the loan file, and sends the loan package to separate warehouse lenders to each fund the loan.
Equity Skimming
Equity skimming is the use of a fraudulent appraisal that over-values a property, creating phantom equity, which is
subsequently stripped out through various schemes.
Fictitious Loan
A fictitious loan is the fabrication of loan documents or use of a real person’s information to apply for a loan which the
applicant typically has no intention of paying. A fictitious loan can be perpetrated by an insider of the financial institution
or by external parties such as loan originators, real estate agents, title companies, and/or appraisers.
21
Loan Modification and Refinance Fraud
This scheme occurs when a borrower submits false income information and/or false credit reports to persuade the
financial institution to modify or refinance the loan on more favorable terms.
Mortgage Servicing Fraud
This fraud is perpetrated by the loan servicer and generally involves the diversion or misuse of loan payments, proceeds
from loan prepayments, and/or escrow funds for the benefit of the service provider.
Phantom Sale
This scheme generally involves an individual or individuals who falsely transfer title to a property or properties and
fraudulently obtain funds via mortgage loans or sales to third parties.
Illegal Property Flipping
A fraudulent property flip is a scheme in which individuals, businesses, and/or straw borrowers, buy and sell properties
among themselves to artificially inflate the value of the property.
Reverse Mortgage Fraud
Reverse Mortgage Fraud involves a scheme using a reverse mortgage loan to defraud a financial institution by stripping
legitimate or fictitious equity from the collateral property.
Short Sale Fraud
Fraud occurs in a short sale when a borrower purposely withholds mortgage payments, forcing the loan into default, so
that an accomplice can submit a “straw” short-sale offer at a purchase price less than the borrower’s loan balance.
Sometimes the borrower is truly having financial difficulty and is approached by a fraudster to commit the scheme. In all
cases, a fraud is committed if the financial institution is misled into approving the short-sale offer, when the price is not
reasonable and/or when conflicts of interest are not properly disclosed.
Two additional fraud schemes, which are briefly addressed below, are debt elimination and foreclosure rescue schemes.
While these schemes are typically not perpetrated directly on financial institutions, and therefore not expanded upon to
the same degree as the above-mentioned schemes, the end result of the scheme can have a negative impact on the
financial institution.
22
Common Mechanisms of Mortgage Fraud Schemes
Mechanism is the process by which fraud is perpetrated. A single mortgage fraud scheme can often include one
or more mechanisms and may involve collusion between two or more individuals working in unison to
implement a fraud. The following is a list of common mechanisms used to perpetrate mortgage fraud schemes:
▪ Asset Rental Cash or other assets are temporarily placed in the borrower’s account/possession in order
to qualify for a mortgage loan. The borrower usually pays a “rental” fee for the temporary “use” of the
assets.
▪ Fake Down Payment. In order to meet loan-to-value requirements, a fake down payment through
fictitious, forged, falsified, or altered documents is used to mislead the lender.
▪ Fraudulent Appraisal fraud can occur when an appraiser, for various reasons, falsifies information on an
appraisal or falsely provides an inaccurate valuation on the appraisal with the intent to mislead a third
party.
Debt Elimination Scheme
Debt elimination schemes are illegal schemes that offer to eliminate a borrower’s debt for an upfront fee. The
organizers of these schemes create phony legal documents based on the borrower’s loan(s) for presentment to
the borrower’s financial institution or other lending institution in an attempt to falsely satisfy the loans. The
threat this fraud scheme presents to a financial institution is the borrower’s cessation of loan payments.
Financial institutions may find that the use of the false documents complicates the collection process and may
temporarily prevent any final action against the borro wer.
Foreclosure Rescue Scheme
Foreclosure rescue schemes prey upon homeowners in financial distress or facing foreclosure, with the
promise to help save their home. There are multiple variations of this scheme, often charging up-front fees
and/or convincing the homeowner to deed the property to the fraudster, with the premise that the
homeowner can rent or buy the property back once the individual’s credit has improved. The goal of the
fraudster is to collect fees or mortgage payments that are intended for the lender, but are not delivered,
usually resulting in the loan going into default and ultimately foreclosure, causing loss to the financial
institution.
Common Participants
Various individuals participate in mortgage fraud schemes. The following list consists of common participants in
such schemes:
Appraiser Closing/Settlement Agent
Processor Title Agent
Borrower Loan Servicer
Real Estate Agent Underwriter Originator
Buyer Warehouse Lender
Seller
23
Consequences of Fraud
Throughout this discussion on mortgage fraud, the emphasis has been on detection, prevention and the impact on the
victims of fraud perpetrators. However, there is another side of fraudulent activities that is the consequence of
committing mortgage fraud.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Mortgage Bankers Association have jointly produced a Mortgage Fraud
Warning Notice. This warning notice makes it clear that mortgage fraud is a federal offense with serious penalties, and
will be fully investigated and prosecuted by the appropriate authorities. The FBI and MBA strongly encourage lenders to
consider integrating the warning notice into their loan processes. The warning notice has the FBI seal and the following
language in bold font:
Mortgage fraud is investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and is punishable by 30 years in federal
prison or $1,000,000 fine or both. It is illegal for a person to make any false statement regarding income,
assets, debt or matters of identification, or to willfully overvalue any land or property, in a loan and credit
application for the purpose of influencing in any way the action of a financial institution.
Conclusion
Mortgage fraud continues to result in significant losses for financial institutions. It is imperative that examiners and
financial institution personnel understand the nature of the various schemes and recognize red flags related to mortgage
fraud. This knowledge and use of best practices will help with the prevention and deterrence of mortgage fraud in the
financial industry
24
Compliance Management
Review (CMR)
CFPB conducts Compliance Management Reviews (CMR) to ensure entities have internal protocols to remain compliant
with published guidelines. CFPB also understands that supervised entities will organize compliance management to
include compliance with consumer-related state and Federal laws that are outside the scope of CFPB’s supervision
responsibilities, in addition to the matters that are within CFPB’s scope. CFPB, therefore, expects that compliance
management activities will be organized within a firm, legal entity, division, or business unit in the way that is most
effective for the supervised entity, and that the manner of organization will vary from entity to entity. This section
discusses the common elements of an effective consumer compliance management system: board of directors and
management oversight, the compliance program, response to consumer complaints, and audit coverage of compliance
matters.
Compliance Management System
A compliance management system is how a supervised entity:
▪ Establishes its compliance responsibilities
▪ Communicates those responsibilities to employees
▪ Ensures that responsibilities for meeting legal requirements and internal policies are incorporated into business
processes
▪ Reviews operations to ensure responsibilities are carried out and legal requirements are met
▪ Takes corrective action and updates tools, systems, and materials as necessary
An effective compliance management system commonly has four interdependent control components:
1) Board and management oversight
2) Compliance program
3) Response to consumer complaints
4) Compliance audit.
When all of the above, four control components are strong and well-coordinated, a supervised entity should be
successful at managing its compliance responsibilities and risks.
Target and Horizontal Reviews
In addition to regularly scheduled examinations, CFPB expects to conduct Target and Horizontal Reviews. Target Reviews
will generally involve a single entity and will focus on a particular situation such as significant volume of particular
customer complaints or a specific concern that has come to CFPB’s attention. Horizontal Reviews will look across multiple
entities to examine issues arising from particular products or practices and determine whether supervisory measures or
enforcement actions are needed
Board of Directors and Management Oversight
CFPB will review an entity to determine how they address consumer compliance issues and associated risks of harm to
consumers throughout product development, marketing, and account administration, and through the entity’s handling
of consumer complaints and inquiries.
In addition, CFPB will request and review training developed as a result of management commitments to address
monitoring, audit, or examination findings and recommendations or issues raised in consumer complaints and inquiries.
25
Consumer
C omplaint Response
An effective compliance management system should ensure that a supervised entity is responsive and
responsible in handling consumer complaints and inquiries. Intelligence gathered from consumer contacts
should be organized, retained, and used as part of an institution’s compliance management system.
Consumer Complaint Response – Examination Objectives
Examiners will consider consumer complaints to determine whether:
1. Consumer complaints and inquiries, regardless of where submitted, are appropriately recorded and
categorized.
2. Complaints and inquiries, whether regarding the entity or its service providers, are addressed and
resolved promptly.
3. Complaints that raise legal issues involving potential consumer harm from unfair treatment or
discrimination, or other regulatory compliance issues, are appropriately escalated.
4. Complaint data and individual cases drive adjustments to business practices as appropriate.
5. Consumer complaints result in retrospective corrective action to correct the effects of the supervised
entity’s actions when appropriate.
6. Weaknesses in the compliance management system exist, based on the nature or number of
substantive complaints from consumers.
Consumer Complaint Response – Examination Procedures
Examiners will review records, interview management, and contact consumers if needed, to evaluate this
consumer response component of the compliance management system. Examiners will:
▪ Obtain and review records of recent consumer complaints and inquiries received by CFPB about the
entity and its service providers
26
Mortgage loan originators are expected to have an in-depth understanding of laws, terms, and procedures associated with
residential mortgage industry. This chapter provides an extensive overview of how the industry works from a MLO perspective.
27
Edition v.122817 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Title and Closing
What determines an individual is a loan originator? (12 CFR 1026.36(a)(1))
A “loan originator” can be either a “loan originator organization” or an “individual loan originator.”
What actions determines if an individual is a loan originator?
An entity may be a “loan originator”, if the entity is an organization or individual that for compensation or other
monetary gain performs loan origination activities, such as:
▪ Taking an application
▪ Arranging a credit transaction
▪ Assisting a consumer in applying for credit. A loan originator assists a consumer in obtaining or applying for credit by
advising on particular credit terms that are or may be available to the consumer based on the consumer’s financial
characteristics.
▪ Offering or negotiating credit terms. Credit terms include rates, fees and other costs. Credit terms are selected based
on the consumer’s financial characteristics when those terms are selected based on any factors that may influence a
credit decision, such as debts, income, assets or credit history.
▪ Making an extension of credit
▪ Referring a consumer to a loan originator or creditor. Referring is an activity included under each of the activities of
offering, arranging, or assisting a consumer in obtaining or applying to obtain an extension of credit.
▪ Advertising or communicating to the public that you can or will perform any loan origination services
Tip:
This definition of “loan originator” is broader than the one under
the SAFE Act and its implementing regulations because Congress chose
to use broader language in the Dodd-Frank Act definition. Remember TILA is under
the authority of the Dodd- Frank Act.
Tip:
If you are a servicer or work for a servicer, you become a loan originator if you
perform loan origination activities on a covered transaction, such as handling a
refinancing or assisting in adding a different consumer on an existing debt.
However, renegotiating or modifying an existing mortgage does not constitute a loan origination activity.
You will find the rules for what determines whether a loan is a modification or a refinance in Regulation Z at
§ 12 CFR 1026.20(a).
28
MLO Activities
An individual is not a loan originator simply due to the performance of the following activities:
▪ Provide bona fide third-party advisory services, such as those an accountant, attorney, or registered financial advisor
would. However, if a MLO advises a consumer on credit terms offered by either the MLO or their employer, or if the
MLO receives, or expect to receive, compensation from loan originators or creditors for providing advice on credit
terms offered by them, or for referring consumers to them, then the individual is a loan originator.
▪ Provide HUD-approved housing counseling services in certain circumstances.
▪ Provide general explanations, information, or descriptions of credit products in response to consumer queries.
▪ Describe other product-related services (for example, optional monthly payment methods via telephone or via
automatic account withdrawals, the availability and features of online account access, the availability of 24-hour
customer support, or free mobile applications to access account information).
▪ As an employee of a creditor or loan originator, provide contact information of a loan originator or creditor for whom
you work or of another person who works for that entity so long as the MLO does not discuss particular credit terms
with the consumer that are or may be available from a creditor or loan originator to that consumer selected based on
the consumer’s financial characteristics, or direct the consumer to a particular loan originator or creditor seeking to
originate credit transactions to consumers with the consumer’s financial characteristics based on the employee’s
assessment of those characteristics.
▪ Perform loan-processing activities, such as compiling and assembling credit application packages and supporting
documentation, for a loan originator or creditor. Implementation.
▪ Persons who coordinate consummation of the credit transaction or other aspects of the credit transaction process,
such as communicating with a consumer about process deadlines and documents needed at consummation, are not
loan originators, provided that any communication that includes a discussion about credit terms available from a
creditor to that consumer selected based on the consumer’s financial characteristics only confirms credit terms already
agreed to by the consumer.
▪ Perform credit underwriting activities, so long as you do not communicate directly with the consumer about specific
credit terms.
29
Compensation
What counts as compensation? (12 CFR 1026.36(a)(3))
For a loan originator, the term “compensation” generally includes salaries, commissions, and any financial or similar
incentive that a MLO can receive and retain.
For example, the term “compensation” includes:
▪ An annual or other periodic bonus
▪ Awards of merchandise, services, trips, or similar prizes (Comment 36(a)-5.i)
Does the name of the fee matter?
Loan originator compensation generally includes retained payments (payments that are earned and kept) and is not
dependent on the label or name given to a fee.
How does the prohibition against compensation based on a transaction term work? (§ 12 CFR 1026.36(d)(1))
The existing compensation provisions in Regulation Z and codified by the Dodd-Frank Act were designed to eliminate some
of the most common incentives that loan originators had historically used to steer consumers into loans that are less
advantageous than those for which the consumers otherwise qualified. The existing rule prohibits loan origination
compensation based on transaction terms, such as interest rate, or a proxy for transaction terms.
The Loan Originator Rule clarifies this existing prohibition, including defining what constitutes a transaction term, clarifying
how to determine whether a factor is a proxy for a transaction term, and clarifying when compensation may be paid based
on profits from a mortgage-related business.
Not Compensable Items
For purposes of the compensation provisions, a loan originator generally may not receive compensation that is based on:
▪ A term of a single transaction.
▪ The terms of multiple transactions conducted by the MLO.
▪ The terms of multiple transactions conducted by multiple loan originators, taken in the aggregate (such as most profits-
based compensation plans).
▪ The rule also prohibits anyone for purposes of the compensation provisions from paying loan originators compensation
that is based on transaction terms. This means creditors, loan originators, or anyone else may not pay their own loan
originator employees or other loan originators (such as brokers) compensation based on the term of a transaction or
multiple transactions.
30
Pro hibited Compensation &
Transaction Term
Examples of prohibited compensation include, but are not limited to:
▪ A loan originator receiving higher compensation based on the transaction’s interest rate, such as receiving 2 percent
of the loan amount if the interest rate is above 6 percent and 1 percent of the loan amount if the interest rate is 6
percent or less.
▪ A loan originator receiving higher compensation based on whether the loan contract contains a prepayment penalty.
▪ A loan originator receiving higher compensation for closing more than 10 transactions per month with an interest rate
higher than 6 percent.
▪ An individual loan originator receiving additional compensation if the consumer buys creditor required title insurance
from the originator’s employer or its affiliate, rather than a third party.
What is a transaction term? (§ 12 CFR 1026.36(d)(1)(ii))
A transaction “term” is any right or obligation of the parties to a credit transaction, except for the amount of credit
extended. “Credit transaction” means the “operative acts” and written and oral agreements that, together, create the
consumer’s right to defer payment of debt or to incur debt and defer its payment.
An example of an “operative act” in a covered credit transaction is the consumer’s purchase of certain goods and services
essential to the transaction, such as required title insurance or a required appraisal.
31
Terms of the transaction include:
▪ Rights and obligations in the note or other credit contract and in the security instrument (and any document
incorporated by reference)
▪ Any fees or charges required to be disclosed in the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure that are: Imposed by the loan
originator or creditor on the consumer for the credit or for any credit-related product or service provided by the loan
originator or creditor.
▪ For any product or service required as a condition of the extension of credit, such as title insurance protecting the
creditor’s interest or an appraisal.
Examples of transaction terms include:
▪ The interest rate
▪ The annual percentage rate
▪ The collateral type (e.g., condominium, cooperative, detached home, or manufactured housing)
▪ The existence of a prepayment penalty
▪ The origination points or fees paid to the creditor or loan originator
▪ Fees for creditor-required title insurance
▪ Varying compensation to a loan originator based on the “product type” often will violate the rule because many
“products” (which is not a defined term) in the market refer to different bundles of specific transaction terms.
Is the amount of credit extended a transaction term? (§ 12 CFR 1026.36(d)(1)(ii))
The amount of credit extended is not a transaction term if the loan originator compensation is based on a fixed percentage
of the amount of credit extended. Such compensation may be subject to a minimum or maximum dollar amount, so long
as the amounts do not vary with each transaction.
Examples:
▪ A creditor is permitted to compensate a loan originator 1 percent of the amount of credit extended for all loans the
originator arranges for the creditor but not less than $1,000 or greater than $5,000 for each loan.
▪ A creditor is not permitted to compensate a loan originator 1 percent of the amount of credit extended for loans of
$300,000 or more, 2 percent of the amount of credit extended for loans of more than $200,000 and less than
$300,000, and 3 percent of the amount of credit for loans of $200,000 or less.
Does the rule prevent loan originators from receiving commissions for performing activities that are not loan
origination activities? (§ 12 CFR 1026.36(d)(1) and comment 36(a)-5.iv)
Individual loan originators
All payments to an individual loan originator are considered compensation for loan origination
activities, regardless of how those charges are labeled. This prohibition prevents loan originators from receiving a
commission for performing a service or selling a product, such as title insurance, that customers buy on the same
transaction.
32
Example
Assume an individual loan originator receives compensation of 100 basis points for each closed covered transaction. The
MLO would be prohibited from receiving an extra commission when consumers purchase title insurance from the MLO’s
employer.
When a consumer directly pays the loan originator, can another person also pay the loan originator on the
same transaction? (§ 12 CFR 1026.36(d)(2)(i)(A))
▪ No. A loan originator may not receive compensation in connection with a particular transaction from both a consumer
and another person.
▪ Also, if any other loan originator receives compensation in a transaction directly from a consumer, then generally the
loan originator may not receive compensation from a person other than the consumer in connection with that
particular transaction
Compensation in connection with a particular transaction, means payments such as commissions, that are specific to and
paid solely in connection with the transaction in which the consumer also paid you compensation. This restriction applies
regardless of when the compensation is paid – whether before, at, or after consummation.
Example
If a loan originator organization receives an origination fee that the consumer pays the MLO directly in a particular
transaction, the MLO may not receive compensation in connection with that particular transaction from a person other
than the consumer, such as a creditor.
What constitutes a direct payment from the consumer?
▪ If a loan originator charges an origination point or fee which a consumer pays in cash or out of the loan proceeds, that
is a direct payment from the consumer.
▪ If a loan originator charges an origination point or fee and that fee is paid using funds from the creditor that result from
an increased interest rate, that is not a direct payment by the consumer.
Example
If a mortgage brokerage firm charges an origination fee, then the consumer agrees to an increased interest rate to generate
a rebate from the creditor. The rebate covers settlement costs, including the origination fee you charged. This is not a
direct payment from the consumer.
When a consumer pays a creditor an origination point or fee, that is not considered a payment to a loan originator. This is
true even if the consumer pays the point or origination fee out of the loan proceeds.
What records must be maintained under the rule? (§ 12 CFR 1026.25(c)(2))
A loan originator organization must maintain records sufficient to evidence:
▪ All compensation you receive from creditors, consumers, and other individuals or entities
▪ All compensation you pay to individual loan originators
▪ The compensation agreements that govern those receipts or payments
▪ Records of payment and receipt of compensation
o Records are sufficient to evidence payment and receipt of compensation if they
demonstrate the following facts:
o The nature and amount of the compensation
o Who paid the compensation
o Who received the compensation
o When the payment and receipt of compensation occurred.
33
Compensation Agreement
A compensation agreement is any agreement – whether oral, written, or based on a course of conduct – that establishes a
compensation arrangement between parties. Examples of compensation agreements include (but are not limited to):
▪ A brokerage agreement between a creditor and a mortgage broker.
▪ Provisions of employment contracts between a creditor and an individual loan originator employee addressing
payment of compensation.
The compensation agreement that an entity must retain for a particular transaction is the agreement that determined the
compensation for that transaction.
How long must records required by the Loan Originator Rule be maintained?
Creditors and loan originator organizations must keep records related to the requirements for loan originator
compensation for three years after the date of payment or receipt of compensation. Record retention is required for three
years after each receipt or payment, even if multiple compensation payments relate to a single transaction.
Example:
Assume a loan originator organization pays an individual loan originator a commission consisting of two separate payments
of $1,000 each on June 5, 2017, and July 7, 2017. The loan originator organization must retain the records of the two
payments through June 4, 2020, and July 6, 2020, respectively.
What information must a loan originator organization include on the loan documents? (§ 12 CFR 1026.36(g))
A loan originator organization for a transaction must provide on specified loan documents the following as applicable:
▪ Loan originator organization’s name and NMLSR ID, if the NMLSR has provided you an NMLSR ID
▪ The name of the individual loan originator (as the name appears in the NMLSR) with primary responsibility for the
origination and his NMLSR ID, if he has one.
34
Tip: If you as a loan originator organization or individual loan originator have been provided a
unique identifier by the NMLSR, it must be included on:
• the credit application
• note or loan contract
• security instrument, regardless of whether you are required to
obtain an NMLSR unique identifier
• business cards
• email
• applicable advertising documents (varies by state law)
What happens when there is more than one loan originator on a transaction?
If there is more than one loan originator for a transaction, then the applicable documents must include the name and
NMLSR ID of the individual loan originator with primary responsibility for the transaction at the time the loan document is
issued.
If the individual loan originator with primary responsibility for a transaction changes, then it will not be necessary to reissue
previously completed documents merely to update a loan originator name and NMLSR ID.
Going forward, an entity would include on loan documents the information about the individual who now has primary
responsibility, and would not include the information about the individual who formerly had primary responsibility.
35
