Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Contents:
▪ Standards
▪ Income
▪ Assets
▪ Credit
▪ Liabilities
▪ Mortgage Insurance
▪ Tax Forms
▪ Occupancy Types
▪ Terms and Definitions
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 1 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Although conventional loans meet the requirements of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, a greater
emphasis here will be on Fannie Mae, the larger of the two GSEs.
Standard Fannie Mae Conforming Guidelines
A mortgage loan originator originating loan files must meet pre-determined underwriting guidelines to
ensure a borrower’s mortgage is saleable to Fannie Mae. Although many mortgage standards are
universal, every originator should become familiar with significant underwriting criteria. Originators can
obtain a more extensive review of these guidelines directly from Fannie Mae’s servicing guide at
http://www.fanniemae.com. Below is an overview of important underwriting guidelines.
Standard Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Properties: single-family residence, 2-4 units, co-ops, leasehold estates, manufactured homes
Occupancy Type: principal residence, second homes and investment properties
Age of credit documents: Maximum age of credit documents is 120 days
Transaction Types: purchase money, refinance transactions, co-op share loans, mortgages with
financed mortgage insurance
Second Liens: Closed-end seconds, HELOCs
Loan Purpose: Purchase, limited cash-out, cash-out
Amortization Type: fully amortized fixed rate, adjustable-rate mortgages, convertible ARMs, balloon
mortgages, biweekly payment schedule, temporary interest rate buy down
Borrower Eligibility: Persons who are legally able to obtain financing depending on state law. “There
is no maximum age limit.”
Non-US Citizens: “Lawful permanent and non-permanent residents of the U.S.” Each lender is
responsible for determining eligibility status.
Credit Score: minimum 620 credit score; credit score requirements vary by transaction type, number
of units and the following: Loan-to-Value (LTV), Combined Loan-to-Value, (CLTV), High Combined Loan
to Value (HCLTV). Freddie Mac term for HCLTV is Total Loan-to-Value (TLTV)
LTV:
• Purchase – The loan amount as a percentage of the purchase price or appraised value,
whichever is less
• Refinance – The loan amount as a percentage of the appraised value
CLTV: Combines more than one loan
TLTV: All outstanding loans, plus any available line of credit (HELOC), also referred to as HCLTV under
Fannie Mae
Pre-purchase Education and Counseling: “HomeReady” borrowers will be required to take a high-
quality online homeownership education course offered by Framework® Reference: Selling Guide
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 2 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Income
General Salary Self-employment
• Mortgage loan originator to • Evidence of stable income • Tax return for borrower
request permission to obtain for two years. earning 25% of their income
tax return (IRS Form4506-T • Continuance of some from commissions
or C) income for three years • Individual with 25% or more
• Non-taxable income can be (alimony, child support, ownership in a business
used to qualify a • Borrowers employed by
disability, social security).
borrower if the income is • Verify the source of family member, receiving
likely to continue for three income. rental income, claiming
years (Social Security, • Provide evidence of most business unreimbursed
disability retirement, child recent 30 days earnings. expenses; periodic
support payment, • W2s covering the most employment
workman’s compensation, recent two years.
certain types of public • Verification of employment
assistance) from employer.
• Borrower’s non-taxable • Third-party verification
income may be grossed up source acceptable (payroll
by 25% vendor).
Under what conditions are tax returns required:
• Borrowers earning 25% of their income from commissions
• Individuals with 25% or more ownership in a business
• Borrowers employed by family members, receiving rental income, claiming business
unreimbursed expenses
• Periodic employment
Commission: Bonus and/or Overtime Student and Installment
Loans
• Average of most recent two • Average income for the last Qualifying borrowers when
years’ income two years no monthly payment is
reflected:
• 1% - Student Loan
Balances
• 5% - Installment Debt
amount
Assets
Earnest Money Reserve Verification
• Must be borrower’s own • Funds which can be easily • Verification of Deposit
funds. converted to cash (VOD), bank and/ or
• Considered a good faith portfolio statements for
deposit in a real estate the most recent two
purchase transaction. months
• Funds will be credited at
closing.
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 3 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Acceptable Sources of Reserves – Generally funds that are easily convertible to cash
Unacceptable Sources of Reserves – Funds that have not been vested and cannot easily be converted
into cash
Stocks, bonds, mutual funds: Maximum 100% of vested balance can be used to establish reserves
Retirement: Maximum 60% of non-vested balance (100% of vested balance) can be used to establish
reserves
Stock options and non-restricted stock are no longer eligible for use as reserves
Gift Funds: Acceptable from an eligible source, such as relative, domestic partner, fiancée, fiancé,
church, municipality, or non-profit organization. “Must not be an interested third-party.” (The seller
or lender cannot provide gift funds, unless they are an acceptable donor).
If LTV ≤ 80% - 1-4 unit principal residence or second home – no min. contribution required from
borrower
If LTV > 80% - 1 unit principal residence - no min. contribution required from borrower
2-4 unit properties – 5% contribution (3% special programs) required
from borrower.
Credit
Credit Score Traditional Credit Reports Non-traditional Credit Reports
• Required for most Fannie Mae • Require four tradelines with • Four sources of active non-
products which can be a mix of revolving and traditional credit with a
obtained from the three FICO installment for 24 months 12-month history
system credit bureaus: • No history of delinquency for • No delinquent rental
Equifax, Experian and Trans 30, 60, 90+ days payment history
Union. • No public record which • Only one 30-day
• Each borrower should have a would jeopardize lien delinquency from one of
minimum of two scores. (judgments, foreclosures, the sources
collections, charged-off
Representative Score accounts)
• Two credit scores; use the • No history of delinquent
lower of the two mortgage or rental payments
• Use the middle score if three • Revolving Accounts: No late
scores reporting in the most recent
• If multiple borrowers, use the 12 months; one 30-day late
lower of the representative in 24 months
score • Installments: No late
reporting in the most recent
24 months
• DTI limit: Varies with AUS
approval otherwise 36%
Liabilities
Types of Liabilities: owner-occupied mortgage payment, revolving/open-end and charge accounts,
lease payments, real estate loans, HELOCs, non-reimbursed employee expenses, alimony, child
support, all other reoccurring monthly debts. For installment debts with a balance of less than 10
payments, an underwriter may choose not to include them in the qualifying debt ratios.
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 4 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Total Monthly Debts or Debt to income ratio (DTI) or Debt Service: 36% for manually underwritten
files including the housing payment.
Housing Expense: 28% for manually underwritten files which includes principal, interest, escrowed
taxes and hazard insurance; mortgage insurance, homeowner’s association dues; monthly condo or
co-op fees and any subordinate financing, if applicable.
Hazard (property) Insurance Coverage: “For a first mortgage, Fannie Mae requires coverage equal to
the lesser of the following:
➢100% of the insurable value of the improvements, as established by the property insurer; or
➢the unpaid principal balance of the mortgage, as long as it equals the minimum amount—80% of
the insurable value of the improvements—required to compensate for damage or loss on a
replacement cost basis. If it does not, then coverage that does provide the minimum required amount
must be obtained.”
Deductible Amount: “The maximum allowable deductible for insurance covering a property (including
common elements in a PUD, condo, or co-op project) securing a first mortgage loan is 5% of the face
amount of the policy. When a policy provides for a separate wind-loss deductible (either in the policy
itself or in a separate endorsement), that deductible must be no greater than 5% of the face amount
of the policy.”
Flood Insurance: “The lender must ensure that any flood insurance required for the security property
is in place.”
Mortgage Insurance: When the lender’s loan-to-value of the property exceeds 80%, or the lender is
financing more than 80% of the value of the property securing the loan, the borrower will be required
to carry mortgage insurance to protect the lender in the event of the borrower’s default. This
mortgage insurance is referred to as Private Mortgage Insurance (PMI). The Homeowners Protection
Act (HPA) sets the requirements for cancelation of mortgage insurance.
1. Borrower requested termination: Loan-to-Value reaches 80% based on the value of the home at
the time of the loan origination and the borrower requests termination
2. Automatic termination: Loan-to-Value reaches 78%, of the original value and cancellation
is automatic.
3. Good payment history: Requested termination requires a good payment history:
(a) No 60 day late payments in 24 months preceding termination
(b) No 30 day late payments in the 12 months preceding termination
(c) Must be current at the time of termination.
The PMI premium is determined by the PMI company and is based on the LTV and other factors, such
as a borrower’s credit and other risk factors. PMI is based on the loan amount, calculated on an
annual basis and paid monthly with each mortgage payment.
Net Rental Income Formula:
(gross rental income* × 75%) − mortgage payment − insurance/maintenance/taxes/misc. = net rental
income
*Used only if tax returns are not available.
Tax Forms:
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 5 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Schedule C – Sole Proprietor
Schedule E – Rental Schedules
Form 2106 – Unreimbursed Employee Expenses
Form 4506-T or Form 4506-C – To obtain tax transcripts
Occupancy:
Timeframe to occupy a property after settlement is 60 days.
Seller Concessions: Fannie Mae will allow the seller or an interested party to contribute to the
borrower’s closing costs and/or prepaid charges under the following conditions based on the lower of
the sales price or the appraised value.
Maximum Contribution
Occupancy Type LTV/CLTV Ratio (Based on the Sales Price)
Principal residence or Greater than 90% 3%
second home
75.01% – 90% 6%
75% or less 9%
Investment property All CLTV ratios 2%
Automated Underwriting: Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac uses a computer-based automated
underwriting system (AUS) to evaluate an applicant's information to provide automated findings.
Based on the applicant's information entered, the electronic system will either provide
recommendations to accept a loan or refer the loan to an underwriter for a manual review of the file.
Both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have their own proprietary automated underwriting system.
• The Fannie Mae system is Desktop Underwriter (DU)
• The Freddie Mac system is Loan Prospector (LP)
A borrower must provide documentation to support any information submitted to the AUS systems:
• The findings from the AUS systems outline the required documentation that needs to be
submitted with the loan file.
• Each file, whether it receives an approval or referral from the automated system, must be a
fully documented loan (most recent record of the past 30-days of paystubs, the most recent
60-days of bank statements and the most recent two years of W2 tax forms).
Source: Fannie Mae
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 6 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Definitions and Terms
Word/Term Fannie Underwriting and Definitions Guide
Properties ▪ Single family – A single unit
▪ Multi-family – considered 2-4 units
▪ Co-ops – ownership rights to a unit where the owns share in common
services and expenses
▪ Leasehold estates – properties where the land has a long-term lease
which will extend 5 years beyond the loan term
▪ Manufactured homes – Manufactured homes attached to land and
considered real property (excludes rental units)
Occupancy Type ▪ Principle residence – occupied by owner as primary residence
▪ Second home – typically a vacation home in a resort area must be at least
50 miles from primary residence
▪ Investment properties – purchased as non-owner-occupied properties
Age of credit Credit documents such as credit reports, income and asset documents like
documentation bank statements must not be more than 4 months old when the borrower
signs the promissory note at closing.
Transaction Types ▪ Purchase money mortgage – where proceeds are used to finance the
purchase of a home. Non- Fannie Mae seller financing may also be
defined as a purchase money mortgage.
▪ Refinance – replacing an existing loan with another loan
▪ CO-OP share loans – financing a property in a co-op where owners share
in common services
▪ Mortgages with financed mortgage insurance – mortgages where the
upfront mortgage insurance premium is financed into the loan
Second Liens Loans that are not primary and are in a junior position. These loans can:
▪ Be closed-end with a defined ending date with no reuse of the loan funds
▪ Open end secured by the equity in the home called a Home Equity Line of
Credit (HELOC)
Loan purpose ▪ Purchase – loan to finance a real estate purchase
▪ Limited cash out – a refinance transaction where the lender will allow the
borrower some cash back typically limited to 2% of the loan amount or
$2,000 whichever is less
▪ Cash out – a refinance transaction where the borrower is removing cash
from the equity in the property to be used for expenditures that are not
associated with the property (ex. debt consolidation)
Amortization Amortization – loan term and payment period
Type/Loan ▪ Fully amortized fixed rate – loan principal and interest payments remain
Products the same for the life of the loan and will pay off the loans by the due date
▪ Adjustable-rate loans – loans where the rate can adjust over the life of
the loan
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 7 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
▪ Convertible ARM – an adjustable rate loan where a small fee is paid at
closing giving the borrower the right to transfer to a fixed rate without
refinancing the loan
▪ Balloon mortgage – a loan where the payments will not pay off the loan
by the due date of the loan. Borrower’s usually refinance to pay off a
balloon mortgage
▪ Biweekly payment schedule – making payments every two weeks.
Equates to one extra payment a year and reduces interest over the life of
the loan
▪ Temporary interest rate buy-down – means that the borrower will have a
lower interest during the first few years of the loan. Ex. 2/1 buy-down, the
note rate on the loan is reduced by 2% in year one and 1% in year 2. The
lender or seller generally pay for the cost of the buy-down.
Borrower eligibility ▪ State law determines when a borrower is old enough to enter into a
contract
▪ The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) does not allow discrimination
based on age if the borrower is old enough to enter into a contract
▪ There is no maximum age limit
Non-US Citizens Lawful permanent and non-permanent residents of the U.S. are eligible for
financing. The lender determines eligibility.
Credit Score Fannie Mae uses the representative score as part of the borrower’s qualifying
process:
▪ Single score – not eligible
▪ Two scores – use the lower of the two as the representative score
▪ Three scores – use the middle score as the representative score
▪ Multiple borrowers – use the lowest representative score
Minimum credit score eligible for purchase by Fannie Mae
▪ Fixed rate – 640
▪ ARM – 660
LTV/CLTV/TLTV Lenders make loans based on the value of the property.
▪ Loan to Value – the loan amount as a percentage of the purchase price or
appraised value whichever is less
▪ Combined Loan to Value – combining more than one loan as a
percentage of the value
▪ Total Loan to Value – is a Freddie Mac term that means the maximum
debt potential. A combination of any outstanding debts against the
property and the HELOC.
HomeReady Designed for credit worthy low to moderate income borrowers. Provides
Mortgage expanded financing in low-income communities and requires borrowers to
participate in pre-purchase education.
IRS Form 4506T or Borrower signs form allowing the lender to get a copy of the filed tax
4506C transcript as part of the income verification process
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 8 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Non-taxable ▪ Non-taxable income like social security, disability and child support can be
income used as qualifying income as long as it will continue for at least three
years.
▪ ECOA does not allow discrimination based on income. Since gross income
is used to qualify the borrower to make it fair for the non-taxable income
we increase it by 25 percent to make it equivalent to taxable income. This
is called grossing up income.
Salary ▪ Must show evidence of stable income over past two years
▪ Must show that non-employment income will likely continue for at least
three more years (ex. Social Security, Child Support, Disability, Alimony)
▪ Must provide most recent 30 days of pay-stubs
▪ Provide W2s covering the most recent 2 years
▪ Verbal employer verification
▪ Third party verification accepted (ex. Payroll service)
Self - Employment Employed individuals are considered self-employed under the following
circumstances:
▪ Borrower earns 25% or more of income in commission or incentives
▪ Borrower owns 25% or more of a company
▪ Borrower is employed by family members
Tax Returns Fannie Mae requires two years of filed tax returns for the following:
required ▪ Borrower earns 25% or more of income in commission or incentives
▪ Borrower owns 25% or more of a company
▪ Borrower is employed by family members
▪ Borrower has periodic employment
▪ Borrower has rental property
▪ Borrower claiming unreimbursed business expenses
Commission, These forms of income may be used if the income can be verified that it has
bonus, overtime, been received for at least two years
tips and self -
employment
income
Debt balance no ▪ General – multiply the balance by 5% to use as a qualifying payment
monthly payment ▪ Student loans - multiply the balance by 1% to use as a qualifying payment
Earnest Money ▪ Good faith deposit held by a seller or real estate broker on a real estate
Deposit purchase transaction
▪ Funds are credited to the borrower when the loan closes
Reserves Assets that are easily converted to cash. May be required by the underwriter
to provide more security that funds will be available to meet the monthly
debt commitments.
Acceptable ▪ Stock portfolio account – allows 100% of account value for reserves
Reserves ▪ Retirement account – allows 60% of non-vested interest in account to be
used for reserves. IRS penalties assessed for early withdrawal
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 9 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Gift Funds Fannie Mae allows gift funds on primary and second home purchases, not
investment properties. They must come from an acceptable donor:
▪ Relative
▪ Domestic partner
▪ Fiancée
▪ Non-profit
The donor may not be, or affiliated with, the:
▪ Builder
▪ Developer
▪ Real estate agent
▪ Seller
▪ Or other interested party to the transaction
Credit Score Fannie Mae uses the FICO credit reporting system, developed by the Fair Isaac
and Company. The system uses three national credit bureaus:
▪ Equifax
▪ Experian
▪ Transunion
Representative Each bureau provides a score that is derived from an algorithm that lenders
credit score use as part of the determination that a borrower is likely to meet the loan
payment requirements. Fannie Mae uses the representative score that will
generally impact the interest rate and terms of the loan.
Representative Score (requires a minimum of two scores)
▪ Two bureaus reporting (two scores) – use the lower of the two scores
▪ Three bureaus reporting (three scores) – use the middle numerical score
▪ More than one borrower – use the lowest representative score
Traditional Credit ▪ Required credit and public record information for each locality where the
borrower has lived within the past 2 years
All credit must be reported that is not considered obsolete:
▪ General credit information is not considered obsolete up to 7 years (legal
statute)
▪ Bankruptcy is not considered obsolete up to 10 years (legal requirement)
Non-Traditional ▪ Borrower does not have a credit score
Credit ▪ Use rental, utilities and other credit records not reported in traditional
credit reports
▪ Generally, 12-month history required
Liabilities There are levels of liabilities highest to lowest:
▪ Mortgage payment
▪ Installment
▪ Revolving
The underwriter may choose to not include installment debt with 10
payments or less to pay. This will provide the borrower with greater qualifying
loan amount.
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 10 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Debt to income ▪ Monthly debts as a percentage of monthly gross income, income before
(DTI) taxes
▪ For manually underwritten conventional loans the maximum DTI is 36%
(Back end ratio)
▪ Included in the DTI is the amount of debt allowed for the housing
payment. For conventional loans the maximum housing payment ratio is
Housing payment 28%
to income
(Front end ratio)
Automated Purchasers, insurers and guarantors of mortgage loans make decisions based
underwriting (AUS) on the borrower’s ability to meet delivery requirements. These entities have
significant historical data on loan performance based on borrower profiles.
This data is incorporated in computer based models that allow any borrower’s
credit profile to be compared to borrowers in the database. This allows for a
system decision, not a human underwriter determination.
Either the system will recommend that the loan be approved, denied or
submitted for further review (refer) by an underwriter and also establish the
required supporting documents. This process is automated underwriting
(AUS). It often allows DTI ratios that exceed the maximum allowed by a
manual underwritten loan. ex. greater than 36% for conventional.
▪ Fannie Mae AUS system – Desktop underwriter (DU)
▪ Freddie Mac AUS system – Loan prospector (LP)
Lenders that meet the terms of an AUS decision are protected from liability in
cases where the DTI exceeded 36% because the decision was not determined
by the lender but by the AUS.
Hazard insurance Insurance coverage is determined by the insurance company and is only for
the improvements (dwelling) not the land:
Requires the lower of:
▪ 100% of the insurable value of the improvements
▪ The unpaid balance, but not less than 80% of the value of the
improvements
It a violation of the law to require a borrower to carry insurance coverage that
exceeds the replacement value of the improvements.
The borrower can have a deductible that is up to 5 percent of the face
amount of the policy.
Flood insurance The lender is responsible for determining if the structure is located in a flood
zone which would require the borrower to carry flood insurance.
Mortgage Mortgage insurance is required when the lender originating a conventional
Insurance for loan is loaning the borrower more than 80% of the value. Here are the facts
conventional, about Private Mortgage Insurance required on conventional conforming
loans:
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 11 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
Private mortgage ▪ Required if the lender is loaning more than 80% of the value
insurance (PMI) ▪ Mortgage insurance premiums are primarily based on LTV, credit score,
and loan product. The higher the risk the higher the mortgage insurance
premium.
▪ Coverage limitations are limited to a maximum of 35%
o Ex. A borrower defaults and the outstanding balance is $100,000
with 35% coverage the lender will receive $35,000 and will need
to receive $65,000 in the foreclosure sale to break even.
Homeowners Prior to the late 90s if a borrower was required to carry mortgage insurance
Protection Act there was no required or automatic mechanism to cancel the insurance.
(HPA) Uninformed consumers often carried mortgage insurance way beyond the
time the loan was a risk to the lender. To address this issue Congress passed
the Homeowners Protection Act which became effective in 1999.
HPA has two methods to terminate private mortgage insurance on
conventional loans:
▪ Automatic termination
o Automatically terminates when the borrower’s loan balance
reaches 78% of the original value
o No required action by the borrower for the termination to occur
other than the borrower is current on the loan at the time of
termination
▪ Requested termination
o Available to borrowers that have paid down their mortgage loan
balance to 80% of the original value.
o Borrower must initiate the request
o Borrower must meet the “good payment history requirement.
➢ No 60-day late payments within the past 24 months
➢ No 30-day late payments within the past 12 months
➢ Must be current at the time of termination.
Rental Income Rental income, less rental and property related expenses, are defined as “net
rental income” calculated based on two scenarios:
▪ Borrower has included the rental income and associated expenses on the
tax return (actual net rental income on the return is used)
▪ Borrower is allowed to use a verified and documented lease agreement to
verify rental income. The borrower will be allowed to use 75% of the
rental revenue. There is a 25% deduction for customary vacancy and
maintenance factors.
▪ Positive net rental income adds to the borrower’s income and negative
net rental income reduces the borrower’s income for mortgage loan
qualifying purposes.
Popular tax forms ▪ Form 1040 – individual tax return form
used in mortgage ▪ Schedule C – sole proprietor (single owner business)
financing ▪ Schedule E – rent revenues and expenses
▪ Form 2106 – unreimbursed employee expenses
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 12 | P ag e
Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines Matrix
▪ Form 4506T or 4506C– allows access to filed taxes transcript
▪ W2 – Shows borrower’s annual gross income
Occupancy Property must be occupied by the borrower within 60 days of loan closing
Seller Concessions A seller is an “interested party contributor” (IPC) and is not allowed to provide
gifts toward the borrower’s down payment or participate in any (IPCs) not
disclosed during the settlement process. However, the seller is allowed to
contribute to the borrower’s closing costs and any pre-paid items associated
with the loan transaction. Any IPCs are deducted from the sales price when
determining LTV and CLTV ratios. The following are the guidelines for
conventional mortgages:
▪ Seller and or IPCs are based on the LTV which is the lower of the sales
price or the appraised value. Ex. Appraised value $220,000 Sales Price
$200,000 the value to be used is the sales price because it is lower.
▪ Less than 10% down or LTV greater than 90% (100-10), maximum seller
contribution 3%
▪ Less than 25% down and up to 10% or LTV 75.01%-90%, maximum seller
contribution 6%
▪ More than 25% down or LTV less than 75%, maximum seller contribution
9%
▪ Investment/non-owner occupied, the maximum seller contributions of all
LTVs is 2%
Seller contributions may never exceed the actual closing costs and prepaid
items associated with the loan.
Non-conforming ▪ Loans that exceed the conventional conforming guidelines for maximum
loans loan amount over $726,200 for a single unit property in standard areas
are non-conforming loans and are not deliverable to Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac. They are purchased by other investors on the secondary
market.
▪ Exception – high-cost areas are allowed to have loan limits that exceed
the conforming loan limits by up to 50 percent of the conforming limit of
$726,200 which is $1,089,300 and in some areas like Alaska and Hawaii
the limit can exceed $1,089,300. Under this scenario these loans would
still be considered conforming loans.
Borrower ▪ Prime – borrowers or “A” borrowers with the lowest risk generally have
categories high credit scores, good assets and income and employment history.
These borrowers get the best loan terms.
▪ Alt/A – borrowers that have credit attributes that are slightly more risky
than prime but more sound than subprime.
▪ Subprime – borrowers that are substantially more risky than prime and
are often referred to as B/C borrowers. Because these borrowers have
limited loan options they are often victims of predatory lending practices.
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 01012023 13 | P ag e
