FHA
MORTGAGE
LOANS
FHA, a brief history

FHA Underwriting

FHA Loan Types

FHA and Insurance

FHA Qualification and Closing

1
Edition v.12012022 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
FHA, a brief history…
The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) was
created by the National Housing Act of 1934 to
provide affordable housing opportunities for
borrowers and to provide protections to lenders
who funded these loans.
Prior to the introduction of the FHA, affordable
financing was not available. This in turn limited
consumer participation in residential mortgage
financing.
FHA, unlike Fannie Mae, does NOT purchase
loans, instead FHA insures loans by covering a
lender’s loss in the event of a borrower’s
default.
In 1965 the Department of Housing and Urban
Development was created as a cabinet level
department to ensure fairness in housing
availability. FHA joined HUD in 1965.
NOTE: Many references to FHA may also be a
reference to HUD as it may be a HUD policy that
is implemented within FHA.
2
F HA Underwriting
FHA requires loans to meet insurance standards before insuring them. Underwriters that
underwrite FHA loans use the Single-Family Policy Handbook 4000.1 to underwrite FHA loans.
A copy can be found here. Be sure to save the link to your Favorites.
3
FHA Underwriting
FHA loans have the following general features.
Low down payment Allows for gift funds: Loans are assumable
 100% of funds needed at New borrower must
Down payment or minimum
closing can be a gift meet lender qualifying
cash investment as low as
 Must come from an standards prior to
3.5% of the sales price
eligible donor such as assuming the loan
(available with credit scores
relative, non-profit balance
above 580)
 Not allowed to be
provided by the seller or
Borrower eligibility:
Longer terms lender
 No age limits
Allows 30-year financing
 Citizens, permanent
In most cases mortgage
residents and non-
insurance referred to as
permanent residents
More liberal underwriting
mortgage insurance
under certain
requirements:
premium (MIP) is required:
conditions
 Credit requirement less  Up front mortgage  Borrowers with
stringent than insurance premium delinquent federal or
conventional (UFMIP is paid at closing) government debts are
 Higher housing expense  Annual mortgage generally not eligible
ratio (front end ratio) insurance premium (MIP for FHA eligibility
PITIA/Income = 31% is annual but paid (there are exceptions)
 DTI ratio (back end ratio) monthly as part of PITIA)
Debt + PITIA/Income = 43%
Seller concessions are
allowed toward:
 Closing costs
 Prepaid items
4
ABOUT FHA LOANS
Section 203(b) - Insured
Mortgage Section 203(K) -
Rehabilitation Loan
✓ The standard and most popular
Section 251 - ARM loans
FHA loan program for purchases
✓ Allows borrowers to finance
and refinancing of primary
improvements into the loan
residences. ✓ Start rate is limited to annual
before taking possession.
✓ A full qualifying loan where the adjustments of 1%.
✓ A minimum of $5,000 in
standard FHA requirements apply. ✓ Maximum rate increase over the life
repairs is required.
of the loan is 5%.
FHA Loan Types
FHA Loan Limits
FHA loan limits are based on Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA). These are geographical areas,
generally counties and/or city environments with larger populations. They may even represent
multiple counties.
The maximum loan amounts are based on the median range of housing costs within a county or
MSA.
For example: the Atlanta, Georgia MSA includes numerous cities and counties and the maximum
loan amount published by HUD in 2023 for a single property is $472,030.
The current national low-cost area mortgage loan limits are 65% of the conventional conforming
loan limit for a single unit property.
This is important because Fannie Mae will purchase FHA loans. And those maximum loan amounts
must stay within Fannie Mae conforming guidelines.
Here’s a link to the HUD loan limits cost lookup. Don’t forget to save to your Favorites.
5
FHA &
INSURANCE
A
ll loan programs covered in this course have some form of
mortgage insurance that protects the lender in the event of the
borrower’s default.
NOTE: The conventional mortgage insurance is known as PMI (Private
Mortgage Insurance). This has nothing to do with FHA which refers to the
mortgage insurance as MIP (Mortgage Insurance Premium).
The FHA mortgage insurance program has both an upfront mortgage insurance premium (UFMIP) paid at
closing or financed into the loan, and an annual mortgage insurance paid monthly as part of the PITIA.
The MIP with FHA is very important because it is utilized to fund the insurance payments that are provided to
the lenders in the event of a borrower’s default. That coverage is 100% of the lender’s loss.
6
FHA &
INSURANCE
Annual Mortgage Insurance
Annual mortgage insurance varies and is based on the loan
amount, loan term, and loan-to-value.
✓ Paid monthly with the PITIA payment
✓ Minimum annual MIP term = 11 years
✓ Maximum annual MIP term = the loan term
FHA Up Front Mortgage Insurance (UFMIP)
✓ All fully qualifying purchases and refinance transactions require
UFMIP
✓ Cost is 1.75 % of the loan amount
✓ Can be financed into the loan
✓ Can be financed over the FHA loan amount limits
o Example: Loan amount limit for the county is $275,665.
The UFMIP is ($275,665 x 1.75%) = $4,824.14
The max. financing includes $275,665 + $4,824.14 =
$280,489.14
✓ Can be paid by the seller as a concession
✓ Can be refunded under the following condition:
o Refinancing to another FHA loan within a 3-year period
o Refund is prorated over a 3-year period
7
FHA Qualification
& Closing
FHA Qualifying Guidelines
FHA (like all other loan programs) has requirements for mortgage payment and DTI ratios for
manually underwritten loans.
Remember these ratios are based on gross monthly income and monthly recurring debts.
▪ Mortgage payment ratio (PITIA ÷ Income) = 31%
▪ DTI ratio (Debt + PITIA ÷ Income) = 43%
8
FHA Qualification & Closing
FHA TOTAL Scorecard FHA Credit Score
FHA uses an automated underwriting FHA down payment requirements are
program with a custom algorithm to tied directly to the representative
determine the loan decision. The credit score.
program is called the FHA TOTAL
 Minimum credit score 580: down
Scorecard.
payment 3.5%
FHA does not have an automated  Minimum credit score 500-579 :
underwriting system (AUS) to carry the down payment 10%
program so the TOTAL Scorecard  Credit scores below 500 are NOT
program can be accessed through the eligible for FHA financing
Fannie Mae DU and Freddie Mac LP
underwriting systems.
Seller Concessions FHA Anti-Flip Policy
FHA will allow the seller to contribute FHA will not approve a borrower for an
to the borrower’s closing cost and FHA loan if the seller of the property
prepaid items: had owned the property for less than
90 days at the time the sales contract
 Up to 6% of the sales price
was executed.
 Closing costs allowable fees include
origination fees, discount points, FHA will require the lender to request
processing, underwriting… a second appraisal at the lender’s
 Tax service can be paid by the seller, expense if the property is being sold
not the borrower for 100% or more over the acquisition
 Not towards the down payment price if the contract is entered into
within the 91st day up to the 180th
day after acquisition.
9
10
