Ameritrain Mortgage
Interactive Magazine
Serving the Mortgage Industry since 2002
The Facts
About
FACTA
USA
Patriot
Act
Read the
Red Flags
Bank Secrecy Act
and FinCEN
GLBA and the
Safeguard Rule
Pa ge
1 | 21
THIS EDITION
Section 1
Start with Security
The Facts about FACTA
E-Sign
Section 2
Reading Red Flags
Section 3
GLBA
Safeguard Rule
Bank Secrecy Act and Money Laundering
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
Section 4
USA Patriot Act
Pa ge
2 | 21
Section 1
Pa ge
3 | 21
Start
As the Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
states in their Start with Security: A
Guide for Business, “When managing
your network, developing an app, or
even organizing paper files, sound
security is no accident. Companies
With
that consider security from the start
assess their options and make
reasonable choices based on the nature
of their business and the sensitivity
of the information involved. Threats
to data may transform over time, but
the fundamentals of sound security
Security
remain constant.” *
* FTC Security Guide for Business
Pa ge
4 | 21
Pa ge
5 | 21
The Facts About
B
ack in 2003 when provisions of the Fair Credit Report Act (FCRA) were about to expire, Congress acted
and extended the FCRA provisions. This became known as FACTA, or the Fair and Accurate Credit
Transaction Act.
In a ‘nutshell’… FACTA includes:
▪ Identity theft provision – added to assist consumers and businesses in
combating identity theft.
▪ National fraud alert system – established with the following:
o A consumer who believes they may be a victim of identity theft may call any of the three national
Consumer Reporting Agencies (CRAs) to report the fact. The CRA receiving the call must put a 1-
year fraud alert on the consumer’s credit file and notify the other two CRAs if the consumer has a
file with them. They also will add an alert to the file.
o If a consumer is a victim of identity theft and proof of their identity, than the fraud alert will extend
from one year to seven-years.
o Pre-screening, the practice of CRAs selling a consumer’s information to companies that solicit the
consumer with credit offers, is stopped for five years.
▪ Truncated credit card numbers – requires company to hide credit card
numbers to assist consumers and businesses in combating identity theft.
▪ The ‘Disposal Rule’ – companies must have secure procedures for the
disposal of consumer reports (i.e., shredding documents).
FACTA
▪ Free Credit Report – national CRAs maintain a website,
annualcreditreport.com, where consumers have a right to request a free annual
credit report from each CRA annually.
▪ Blocking – requires CRAs to ‘block’ information placed in a consumer report due
to identify theft.
▪ Identity theft business records – copies must be provided when requested.
▪ Active Duty Alert – upon request, CRAS must include an alert in a military consumer’s file.
Pa ge
6 | 21
E-Sign Act
Speeding things up!
Our society is concerned with speed and convenience. With this in mind, the Electronic Signatures in Global
and National Commerce Act (E-Sign Act) was enacted.
Why it was enacted
The rule that allows for electronic records and signatures for transactions involving interstate or foreign
commerce, significantly improved the speed and efficiency of communication by allowing for electronic
transmission of signatures and documents. This is a significant benefit to the residential mortgage industry
because consumers can participate in a financial transaction with the highest degree of convenience.
How to apply:
▪ The E-Sign Act allows the use of electronic records to satisfy any statute, regulation, or rule of law requiring
that such information be provided in writing.
▪ The consumer must affirmatively consent to such use and has not withdrawn such consent.
▪ Financial institutions must provide the consumer a clear and conspicuous statement informing the
consumer:
o Of any right or option to have the record provided or made available on paper or in a non-electronic
form; and
o The right to withdraw consent, including any conditions, consequences, and fees in the event of such
withdrawal; and
o Whether the consent applies only to the particular transaction that
triggered the disclosure or to the identified categories of records that
More information can
may be provided during the course of the parties’ relationship.
be found at this link.
▪ If the consumer consents electronically, or confirms his or her consent
electronically, it must be in a manner that reasonably demonstrates the
consumer can access information in the electronic form that will be used to
provide the information that is the subject of the consent.
▪ Oral communications or a recording of an oral communication shall not qualify as an
electronic record. E-sign documents must be retained for 5 years.
Pa ge
7 | 21
Pa ge
8 | 21
A
red flag is a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity
theft. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) requires financial institutions to develop a written
“Identify Theft Prevention Program” that is designed to detect, mitigate, and prevent identity theft.
The FTC created 26 red flag items that must be included in the program to help creditors identify fraudulent
activities.
The following are the categories of the 26 red flags:
Pa ge
9 | 21
Red Flag details shown on the following pages.
NOTE: According to the FTC; “technology and criminal technics change constantly, so it’s important to keep up-
to-date on new threats.” *
1) A fraud or active duty alert is included with a consumer report.
2) A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of credit freeze in
response to a request for a consumer report.
3) A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of address discrepancy,
as defined in 681.1(b) of this part.
4) A consumer report indicates a pattern of activity that is inconsistent with
the history and usual pattern of applicant activity, such as:
a. A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries.
b. An unusual number of recently established credit relationships.
c. A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit
relationships.
d. An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial
institution or creditor.
5) Documents provided for identification appear to have been altered or
forged.
6) The photograph or physical description on the identification is not
consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer presenting
the identification.
7) Other information on the identification is not consistent with
information provided by the person opening a new covered account or
customer presenting the identification.
8) Other information on the identification is not consistent with readily accessible information that is on file
with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or recent check.
9) An application appears to have been altered/forged, or gives the appearance of having been destroyed and
reassembled.
Pa ge
10 | 21
Red Flag details continued.
10) Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when compared
against external information sources used by the financial institution or
creditor. For example:
a. The address does not match any address in the consumer report.
b. The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on
the Social Security Administration's Death Master File.
11) Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying
information provided by the customer. For example, there is a lack of correlation between the SSN range
and date of birth.
12) Personal identifying information provided is associated with known fraudulent activity as indicated by
internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example:
a. The address on an application is the same as the address provided on a fraudulent application; or
b. The phone number on an application is the same as the number provided on a fraudulent application.
13) Personal identifying information provided is of a type commonly associated with fraudulent activity as
indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example:
a. The address on an application is fictitious, a mail drop, or a prison; or
b. The phone number is invalid, or is associated with a pager or answering service.
14) The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other persons opening an account, or other customers.
15) The address or telephone number provided is the same as (or similar to) the account number or telephone
number submitted by an unusually large number of other persons opening accounts or other customers.
16) The person opening the covered account fails to provide all required personal identifying information on
an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete.
17) Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on
file with the financial institution or creditor.
18) For financial institutions and creditors that use challenge questions, the person opening the covered
account cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from
a wallet or consumer report.
Pa ge
11 | 21
Red Flag details continued.
19) Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a covered account,
the institution or creditor receives a request for a new, additional, or
replacement card or cell phone; or for the addition of authorized users
on the account.
20) A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated
with known patterns of fraud. For example:
a. The majority of available credit is used for cash advances or merchandise that is easily convertible to
cash (e.g., electronics equipment or jewelry); or
b. The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent
payments.
21) A covered account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the
account. For example:
a. Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;
b. A material increase in the use of available credit;
c. A material change in purchasing or spending patterns;
d. A material change in electronic fund transfer patterns in connection with a deposit account; or
e. A material change in telephone call patterns in connection with a cellular phone account.
22) A covered account that has been inactive for a reasonably lengthy period of time is used (taking into
consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage, and other relevant factors).
23) Mail sent to the customer is repeatedly returned as undeliverable although transactions continue to be
conducted in connection with the customer's covered account.
24) The financial institution or creditor is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements.
25) The financial institution or creditor is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a
customer's covered account. Notice can be from customers, victims of identity theft, law enforcement
authorities, or other persons regarding possible identity theft in connection with covered accounts held by
the financial institution or creditor.
26) The financial institution or creditor is notified by a customer, a victim of identity * More information
theft, a law enforcement authority, or any other person, that it has opened a can be found at this
link.
fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft.
Pa ge
12 | 21
3
n
o
i
t
c
e
S
Pa ge
13 | 21
GLBA
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA)
Also, known as the “Financial Services Modernization Act” provides rules and regulations associated with the
dissemination and protection of non-public consumer information. GLBA is regulation “P” and is enforced by
the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau (CFPB).
Who must comply
The GLB Act applies to “financial institutions” – companies that offer financial products or services to
individuals like loans, financial or investment advice, or insurance.
The requirements:
▪ Requires companies to give consumers privacy and right to opt out notices that explain the institution’s
information sharing practices on an annual basis as long as a relationship exists.
▪ Consumers have the right to opt out or say no to having their information shared with certain third parties.
▪ If a consumer does not opt out, the non-public information of the consumer may not be shared with
telemarketing, direct mail marketing, or marketing through email companies.
▪ It prohibits pretexting, which is receiving non-public information through false pretenses.
Penalties for violating GLBA
▪ A financial institution can be fined up to $100,000 for each violation.
▪ The officers and directors of the financial institution can be fined up to $10,000 for each violation.
▪ Criminal penalties include imprisonment for up to 5 years, a fine, or both.
Pa ge
14 | 21
GLBA
Safeguard Rule
What is the Safeguard Rule?
As part of GLBA implementation, the FTC issued the Safeguard Rule which requires financial institutions to:
▪ Have measures to keep customer information safe.
▪ The rule mandates companies to develop a written information security
plan that describes their program to protect customer information. More information can
o Ex. Password protected computers that have customer non-public be found at this link.
information and locked file cabinets that contain hard copy files of
customer information.
Pa ge
15 | 21
Bank Secrecy Act
&
Anti-Money Laundering
Bank Secrecy Act and Anti Money Laundering (BSA/AML)
O
ne of the primary challenges we are faced with in the residential mortgage industry is money
laundering. Money launderers use illegal funds to invest in legitimate financial transactions with the
intent to honor those financial commitments.
The law that addresses this issue directly is the Foreign Transactions Reporting Act of 1970, commonly known
as the Bank Secrecy Act.
How to apply
The law requires financial institutions to assist U.S. government agencies
with detecting and preventing money laundering activities.
Specifically, the Act requires financial institutions to:
▪ Keep records of cash purchases of negotiable instruments.
▪ File reports of cash transactions exceeding $10,000, (daily aggregate
amount).
▪ Report suspicious activity that might signify money laundering, tax
evasion, or other criminal activities.
Pa ge
16 | 21
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)
While the BSA mandates that financial institutions report suspicious activities, the Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network, FinCEN, is a bureau of the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Their mission is to safeguard the financial
system from illicit use, combat money laundering, and promote national security through the collection, analysis,
and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities. Suspicious activity reports
(SARs) are provided to FinCEN to carry out its responsibilities.
▪ Non-bank financial institutions requirements:
o The BSA defines the term ‘‘financial institution’’ to include, in part, a loan or finance company.
o The term, however, can reasonably be construed to extend to any business entity that makes loans to
or finances purchases on behalf of consumers and businesses.
o Non-bank residential mortgage lenders and originators (‘‘RMLOs’’—generally known as ‘‘mortgage
companies’’ and ‘‘mortgage brokers’’ in the residential mortgage business sector) are a significant
subset of the ‘‘loan or finance company’’ category and are required to meet the requirements of
FinCEN.
How to apply
FinCEN, under the BSA, requires RMLOs as loan or finance companies to establish anti-money laundering
programs and report suspicious activities under the Bank Secrecy Act. At a minimum, the program must
include:
▪ The development of internal policies, procedures, and controls More information can
▪ The designation of a compliance officer be found at this link.
▪ An ongoing employee training program
▪ An independent audit function to test programs And this link.
▪ The BSA also requires financial institutions to file suspicious activity reports
(‘‘SARs’’)
Pa ge
17 | 21
Section 4
Pa ge
18 | 21
USA Patriot Act
You may or may not know the USA Patriot Act stands for:
Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate
Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism.
September 11, 2001 changed the United States forever. The terrorist attack was the basis for the Patriot Act.
The purpose of the Act was, and is, to deter and punish terrorist acts in the United States and around the
world.
The law has an additional purpose of enhancing law enforcement investigative tools, some of which are:
▪ To strengthen U.S. measures to prevent, detect, and prosecute international money laundering and
financing of terrorism;
▪ To subject to special scrutiny foreign jurisdictions, foreign financial institutions, and classes of international
transactions or types of accounts that are susceptible to criminal abuse;
▪ To require all appropriate elements of the financial services industry to report potential money laundering;
▪ To strengthen measures to prevent use of the U.S. financial system for personal gain by corrupt foreign
officials and facilitate repatriation of stolen assets to the citizens of countries to whom such assets belong.
There are multiple sections of the USA PATRIOT Act that address anti-terrorism measures. We will review two
that directly affect the residential mortgage industry:
Section: 314 – Corporative Efforts to Deter Money Laundering
Pa ge
19 | 21
Helps law enforcement identify, disrupt, and prevent terrorist acts and money laundering activities by
encouraging further cooperation among law enforcement, regulators, and financial institutions to share
information regarding those suspected of being involved in terrorism or money laundering.
Section: 326 – Verification of Identification – Customer Identification Program (CIP)
Prescribes regulations establishing minimum standards for financial institutions and their customers regarding
the identity of a customer that must apply with the opening of an account at the
financial institution. The program should be in writing.
More information can
The CIP must contain account-opening procedures detailing the identifying be found at this link.
information that must be obtained from each customer. At a minimum, the bank
must obtain the following identifying information from each customer before
opening the account.
▪ Name
▪ Date of birth for individuals
▪ Address
▪ Identification number
Pa ge
20 | 21
Your One Stop Multi-State Training Provider
Pre-License and Continuing Education
Quality Mortgage Education Since 2002
Exam
Prep
MLO Licensing
Consulting System
Custom
Training
Pa ge
21 | 21
