National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
The National Flood Insurance Program is administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
Flood Zones
Flood hazard areas identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map are identified as a Special Flood Hazard
Area (SFHA). SFHA are defined as the area that will be inundated by the flood event having a 1-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The 1-percent annual chance flood is also
referred to as the base flood or 100-year flood. Moderate flood hazard areas are labeled Zone B and
Zone X which are areas outside the SFHA, but still shaded on the map. These flood areas are between
the limits of the base flood and the 0.2-percent-annual-chance referred to as 500-year flood. Zones C
and X not shaded on the map are also outside the SFHA, but are considered areas of low risk.
1
Edition v.122220 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)
A high‐risk flood area that has special flood, mudflow, or flood‐related erosion hazards. The land area covered by
the floodwaters of the base flood is the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) on NFIP maps. The SFHA is the area
where the National Flood Insurance Program's (NFIP's) flood plain management regulations are enforced where
the mandatory purchase of flood insurance applies. The SFHA includes Zones with an A or V designation.
Zone VE or V are the most hazardous areas, usually first row beach front properties. Zone A relates to areas
near lakes, streams or other bodies of water. Both of Zones V and A:
• Considered a high flood risk
• Require mandatory flood insurance
• Have a 1 percent annual chance of flooding and a 26 percent chance of flooding during a 30‐year
mortgage.
Zones Requiring Mandatory Flood Insurance
A – 100 year - 1% annual chance of flood - near water
V – 100 year - 1% annual chance of flood - costal region (storm induced wave)
VE- 100 year - 1% annual chance of flood - costal region (storm induced velocity wave action)
2
VVeerriiffiiccaattiioonnss
Zones Not Requiring Mandatory Flood Insurance
B & X shaded on map – 500 year between .2% and 1%
C & X not shaded on the map
D – areas not yet studied by FEMA
Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
Computed elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the base flood. BFEs are shown on Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and on flood profiles. This relationship between the BFE & elevation determines the
flood insurance premium.
Mortgage Lenders Responsibilities:
A mortgage lender must:
• Determine if a structure is located in a SFHA
• Ensure a borrower has flood insurance if their structure is located in an SFHA
• Require a borrower to escrow for flood insurance If the borrower currently escrows for taxes and
insurance
• Implement force placed insurance coverage after a 45-day notice period if the borrower lets their flood
insurance lapse
If there is a dispute between the borrower and the lender on the need for flood insurance, then FEMA can
resolve the matter.
3
Pre-Closing,
Closing, & Ti tle
·-
..
·-
--
· -
..
Mortgage loan origi nators are expected to have an in-depth understanding of laws, terms, and procedures associated with
residential mortgage industry. This chapter provides an extensive overview of how the industry works from a MLO perspective.
=
. I
:IJ
1
Edition v.122220 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Settlement Documents
Settlement Documents
There are two categories of documents in the settlement process. Documents that relate to a sale and
documents that relate to a loan.
Sale Loan
Instrument Participants and Details Instrument Participants and Details
Deed or • Instrument that transfers real • Mortgage • Instrument that shows the
Warranty Deed property from a seller to a real estate as security for the
buyer • Recorded loan
Recorded • Seller signs the Deed and is • Borrower signs and is the
the Grantor • Used mostly in a Mortgagor
• Buyer is the Grantee Lien theory state • Lender is the Mortgagee
• Deed of Trust • Instrument that shows the
real estate as security for the
• Recorded loan
• Borrower signs and is the
• Used in a Title Trustor
Theory state • Third party is the Trustee
• Lender is the Beneficiary
2
Settlement Documents
The settlement agent will explain the following documents associated with the consummation and recording of a real
estate transaction. At settlement, several of these documents are executed in accordance with a lender’s instructions and
state law.
• Certificate of Occupancy (CO) – A local city or county inspector provides this document as evidence a
building met all building and zoning codes and regulations.
• Deed – A deed transfers ownership of real property. The document lists the buyers’ and sellers’ names and
the legal description of the property. The most common form of a deed is a warranty deed; as it certifies that
the sellers will be liable if clear title is not available. Because the seller has warranted that it has no liens, and
he or she has no liens, the property can be conveyed.
• Deed in Lieu – A voluntary transfer of ownership to the lender in exchange for the release from liability on
the loan. Happens when the borrower is no longer able to make payments and this will avoid a foreclosure if
the lender agrees to the transfer and terminates the liability on the loan.
• Deed of Trust – A deed of trust is a three-party security instrument for the transfer of real estate, which
includes a beneficiary. Deed of trust is associated with a title theory state.
• Deficiency Judgement – A lender may seek a deficiency judgement against a borrower after the sale of a
foreclosed property if the lender did not receive enough from the sale to cover the outstanding balance.
Lenders are required to disclose to the borrower if the state protects or does not protect the borrower from
liability after foreclosure.
• Deed Restrictions – Restricted use of the land that has been recorded in the county register. Restrictive
covenants in a subdivision relating to elements like square footage limitations, color schemes, use of fencing,
etc. are examples of deed restrictions.
• Foreclosure – The process where a lender exercise the right to force the sale of a property that secures the
loan when the borrower has reached the level of delinquency allowed by law to allow such right to be
exercised.
• Insurance – Homeowner’s Insurance is a requirement of a loan. It guarantees replacement of the
improvements if loss occurs within the boundaries of the insurance policy. Includes fire, hazard and flood
insurance.
• Mortgage – The purpose of a mortgage is the creation of a voluntary lien that real estate collateralizes
for the repayment of a debt. The mortgage is a two-party instrument including the mortgagor and
mortgagee, and is associated with a lien theory state.
• Note - Borrowers sign a separate promissory note giving a personal guarantee to repay the outstanding
loan. The note is secured by the security property using the Deed of Trust or Mortgage. It is not a
recorded document.
• Satisfaction of Mortgage – In a state where the mortgage is the recorded instrument, the Satisfaction of
Mortgage is evidence that the debt has been paid and the lien has been extinguished.
• Survey – A survey is a plan that outlines the boundaries and measurements of a property. It includes all
barriers, driveways and all buildings located on the property.
• Title Insurance (Lender) – Title insurance is a policy that protects the lender against any liens or
encumbrances that may affect the title. This policy is a transferable one-time payment at settlement
where the lender coverage decreases as the outstanding liability decreases.
• Title insurance (Owner - Optional) – Title insurance policy protects the owner against existing defects
against the title that may have been missed in the title examination. It is not transferable. This is a one-
time payment at settlement.
• Transfer tax is a tax charged by a city or county when a title to real property is transferred to a new
party.
3
Settlement Process
The settlement process includes the executing of the legal documents associated with the real estate
transaction.
▪ The process is facilitated by a closing agent who may be an attorney, settlement agent, notary, escrow
agent etc.
▪ Includes the collection and transfer of money from the buyer to the seller in a purchase transaction or
the payoff and transfer of funds between lenders and borrowers in a refinance transaction
▪ Includes executing documents and the collection of fees for title insurance, property insurance,
government fees, wire fees and other related fees
▪ The Closing Disclosure is the documents that is provided to the applicant, generally by the lender, at
least 3 business days before closing. This document reflects the actual final totals relating to items
disclosed on the Loan Estimate. The lender may choose to use the settlement agent to review the
Closing Disclosure at the time of consummation when the legal documents are executed.
▪ Other documents that are executed at the time of consummation are the:
o Promissory note – applicant’s promise to pay based on the terms in the note
o Deed - the instrument transferring the ownership of the property. This document is recorded.
o Mortgage or Deed-of-Trust – security instruments associated with the loan. These documents
are recorded.
Closing Agent
A closing agent, also known as a settlement agent, is an impartial third party that oversees the finalization of a
real estate transaction. Closing agents execute the documents related to finalizing the transaction including the
collection and distribution of funds and recording of the documents. Closing agents are either a title company,
escrow agent, attorney, or notary. The document used to reconcile the transaction is a Closing Disclosure (CD).
There is a CD for the borrower; which is the responsibility of the lender, and a CD for the seller; which is the
responsibility of the closing agent.
Explanation of Fees
Settlement fees include:
▪ Origination for the lender and/or the broker (underwriting, processing, wire, etc.)
▪ Third party vendor
o Closing agent
o Title related
o Government related, transfer taxes, intangible tax, and recording
▪ Prepaid items like homeowner’s policy paid at closing and per diem interest
▪ Setup an escrow account
4
Many states follow the guidelines of the wet settlement act, which requires lenders to provide funds to settle
all loans at the time of closing. This ensures that a settlement agent can disburse funds to all parties of the
transaction. In wet funding or non-escrow states, funds to settle the loan are sent to the settlement agent prior
to the borrower signing all closing documents and all parties meeting for the closing. All conditions must be
satisfied before the lender gives permission to the settlement agent to release funds.
Dry settlement, or escrow, states operate differently from wet funding states. In these states, a borrower must
first sign closing documentation and then bring any required funds to settle the loan at closing. The settlement
agent then sends several signed documents for review to the lender. Once the lender determines the loan is in
order, funds are wired to the escrow account of the settlement agent for disbursement. In essence, a borrower
can still have outstanding conditions prior to funding in dry funding states.
Table funding: Mortgage brokers can close loans in the broker’s name. The funds are provided by the lender at
closing. The mortgage broker transfers the loan to the funding lender at closing. This is not a secondary market
transaction and no service release premium is earned.
Acceptable Funds at Settlement
Depending on state law, the following are examples of good funds that a settlement agent may accept from a
buyer or seller at closing:
1. Certified bank check
2. Bank Cashier’s check
3. Certified credit union check
4. Check from an attorney’s escrow or trust account
5. Wired funds credited to the closing attorney’s escrow account
The following are examples of what is NOT acceptable as good funds.
1. A personal check
2. A mutual fund or money market check
3. An out-of-state attorney’s check
4. A credit union check
Whose name should be on the check?
Borrowers should have checks payable to themselves, which they can then endorse over to the settlement
agent at closing.
5
Preparing the Borrower for Closing
Borrower Checklist
1. Certified Funds – Many states comply with the wet settlement act. A borrower must bring good funds to the
closing. The Borrower will be given instructions by the Closing Attorney or Closing Agent of an Escrow Company,
as to the form and amount of funds that should be brought to closing.
2. The borrowers should also bring their checkbook in the event additional funds are needed.
3. Picture Identification - Some form of picture identification will be required from each borrower at closing – a
driver’s license or passport is acceptable. If the borrower has neither, the settlement agent will need prior
approval of any alternative identification.
4. Proof of Insurance or Original homeowner’s insurance policy (Fire or Hazard Policy)– In some instances the
borrower can bring an acceptable insurance policy in an amount deemed necessary by the lender, and not less
than an amount sufficient to replace improvements on the property to cover the first year’s premium. It must
have a proper mortgagee clause. In most instances, the insurance company will provide an insurance binder in an
amount to be adequate to replace all improvements on the property. It is customary to verify adequate
insurance is available and paid in full before the loan can close.
5. Power of Attorney or Attorney-In-Fact – A power of attorney, also known as a general power of attorney, gives
an individual the right to represent the physical, financial or legal interests of a particular person. Typically, the
lender will only allow the use of a specific power of attorney in real estate transactions. This gives the power of
attorney an ability to sign closing documents for the subject property only. The power of attorney document
must receive lender and attorney or escrow approval prior to closing. Settlement Agents will require the original
specific power of attorney document with original signatures prior to closing. Copies of the form are not
acceptable. The settlement attorney will record the original document along with the warranty deed and other
closing documents.
6. Any closing conditions required by the lender, such as pay stubs or a gift letter, must be brought to the closing.
7. Other required documents – This could include an original termite letter or applicable septic and well water
inspections.
Seller Checklist
1. Picture Identification - Some form of picture identification will be required from each borrower at closing,
whether it be a driver’s license or passport. If the borrower has neither, prior approval of alternative
identification from the attorney is required.
2. Power of Attorney – Usually a power of attorney for the seller does not require lender approval, but must be in
an acceptable form requested by the settlement agent.
3. House keys and garage door openers
4. Other documents - Original termite letter (if applicable) and septic and well water inspections (if applicable).
5. Certificate of Occupancy (CO) – This document is issued by the county for newly constructed or renovated
homes. If the seller is a builder, a CO will be required at closing.
6
