Chapter Introduction
At this point in our journey, the loan originator has completed the application except for the
property address, and the results from the automated underwriting have been received. The
borrower brought supporting documents to the interview and copies of the supporting
documents were made by the mortgage loan originator, and the originals were returned to the
borrower. The processor will now enter the picture as the person who verifies the information
and documents the borrower has provided. The processor can be an employee of the mortgage
broker and or the mortgage lender. If a processor is an employee, the following standards must
be met for the processor to be exempt from the licensing requirements for loan origination:
▪ Perform only clerical and support activities for a single entity
▪ Be an employee of a licensed mortgage lender or mortgage broker
▪ Be paid on a W2 basis
▪ Be supervised by a registered or licensed mortgage loan originator through the NMLS
▪ Take no loan applications
▪ Does not negotiate rates and terms
▪ Does not represent to the public in any way that they are involved in the origination
process
1
Edition v.01072020 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Processor as Independent Contractor
If a processor is an independent contractor they would not meet the standards of an employee
because they are not paid on a W2 basis, are not supervised by a mortgage loan originator, and
represent multiple entities.
Independent contract processors must meet all the requirements of a licensed mortgage
originator. Even though the processor does not originate loans they would be required to meet
those standards. We will address the specific standards for loan origination later in this course.
Administration and Verification
The mortgage loan processor's function is crucial as it is in this capacity that the processor verifies
borrowers' information as part of a mortgage loan file in preparation for an underwriter to review.
The underwriter will make the final decision on behalf of the lender if there will be a loan
commitment and ultimate funding of the loan. The processing function is considered administrative
and involves the collection, application, evaluation of information provided, requesting missing
items and ordering additional services. The processing function is more operational and less sales
oriented. In fact, the processor should only be involved in the overall process after loan origination.
Processing occurs after the mortgage loan originator receives the application information. The
processor ensures that the collected information has integrity by confirming the following:
2
Verifications
Verification of Employment
The verification of employment must cover at least two (2) years of stable employment for a job that does not
have a definitive ending date. The Fannie Mae form is the official verification of employment form provided to
the employer to verify employment. The borrower's employer must complete the form and return it to the
processor. Underwriting guidelines do not allow the borrower or any interested third party to deliver this
document to the processor or lender.
▪ 2 years stable and 3 years of continuance
The verification of employment is to cover at least the most recent two (2) years of stable income for
employment that does not have a definitive ending date. If the income has a specific end date, such as
social security or child support, then the income must meet the 3-year continuance test. A lender will use
the awards letter for social security and any decree requiring the payment of child support to determine if
those benefits are allowable for income purposes. Generally, any income associated with a child will
typically end at age 18. The processor will not use the income as qualifying income for a child who is already
15 years old at the time of the application. Qualifying income is the monthly gross income that includes
social security, Medicare, and withholding taxes.
▪ Non-taxable income
If the income is confirmed as nontaxable and its tax-exempt status is likely to continue, the lender may
make an adjustment for tax purposes. Under this scenario, the lender will develop an “adjusted gross
income” for the borrower by adding an amount equivalent to 25% of the nontaxable income to the
borrower’s income. Essentially, the new adjusted income will become equivalent to gross income before
taxes are deducted.
▪ Tax returns to verify income
If the borrower’s income is considered self-employed, then the most recent two (2) years of tax returns are
required.
▪ Other documents
o The most recent 30 days of paystubs
o The most recent 2 years of W2s
Verification of rental
Borrowers who do not already own a home are qualified based on rental history. The processor will verify the
most recent 12 months of rental history.
3
Verifications
Verification of Rental
▪ Borrowers who do not already own a home are qualified based on rental history. The processor will verify
the most recent 12 months of rental history
Verification of Mortgage
▪ Borrowers who already own a home are qualified based on their mortgage payment history. The processor
will verify the most recent 12 months of mortgage payments.
Verification of Assets
▪ The main verification of assets is cash assets found on a bank statement. The processor will verify the most
recent 60 days of bank statements. If there has been an average balance that is still reflected in the account
for the past 60-days, the funds are considered seasoned and are generally accepted. Any large deposits or a
current balance that is substantially greater than the average balance will need to be sourced and verified.
▪ Once these verifications have been completed the processor will verify that the collected information
supports the data used to receive a preliminary approval provided by the automated underwriting system
(AUS). Sometimes there are missing pieces of information such as a paystub or W2. In those cases, since the
loan has already been originated the processor can contact the borrower to collect any missing documents
or get updated or correct information that was provided in error or not collected. The processor will use
third party sources, such a payroll services and public records, as part of the verification process. Unless the
processor can verify information provided is accurate the underwriter will not receive the file as any loan
approval decision would be based on inaccurate information.
4
Preapproval Letter
The processor and mortgage loan originator work together with the borrower to ensure that all outstanding
conditions to complete the application and verification documents are cleared.
Preapproval letter
Now that we have completed the verification process and have verified that the borrower meets the basic
approval requirements, it is time to find a real property that will fit within the parameters of the borrower’s
approval . To begin the house hunting process, the lender will issue the borrower a preapproval letter. A
preappro val letter is provided to the borrower with the qualifying details to allow the borrower to begin the
home pu rchase process. The letter will provide the real estate agent the needed security that they are working
with a bo rrower that has already been preapproved.
The processor will now wait for the real estate contract to complete the last outstanding item for the loan
application.
5
