Mortgage loan originators are expected to have an in-depth understanding of laws, terms, and procedures associated with
residential mortgage industry. This chapter provides an extensive overview of how the industry works from a MLO perspective.
1
Edition v.01072020 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Uniform Residential Appraisal Report
The Uniform Residential Appraisal Report (URAR) is the primary appraisal form used in the real estate industry
to report property values.
A full appraisal report is also known as a Fannie Mae Form 1004. An exterior inspection, or a drive-by appraisal,
is referred to as Form 2055. Below are important aspects of appraisals that an MLO should know.
MLO Requirements and Limitations
▪ An MLO is prohibited from attempting to influence the independent judgment of an appraiser
▪ Anyone receiving any incentive as a result of the loan closing is not allowed to select the appraiser
▪ The borrower is not allowed to pay the appraiser at the door
Terms
▪ Subject property – Property being purchased, refinanced or seeking secondary financing
▪ Comps – Properties that have sold recently, close to the subject property and similar in size and
features (generally 3-6 comps required on a loan transaction)
▪ Geographic and Market Analysis – Addresses the economic setting of the property and the market
forces that might impact the value
▪ Internal Obsolescence – Internal factors that could impair the ability to sell the property. (ex. 5
bedroom house with 1 bath)
▪ Economic Obsolescence – External factors that could impact the ability to sell the property.
▪ VA appraisal – Certificate of Reasonable Value (CRV)
▪ Automated Valuation Model (AVM) – Computer programs that can provide a probable value range for
properties by performing a statistical analysis of available data
▪ HVCC – Home Valuation Code of Conduct – Result of Fannie Mae settlement with the New York City
Attorney General to improve appraisal independence and integrity rules. Replaced by the provisions of
Dodd Frank Act.
Types of Appraisals
▪ Sales comparison or Market data approach – Uses comps. to determine subject property value.
Generally used in an established environment where sales have taken place.
▪ Cost approach – Determining the cost to rebuild. Generally used in an insurance claim.
▪ Income approach – Used with a loan relating to an investment property. Appraiser determines the fair
market rental value of the subject property.
Application Information and Requirements
The receipt of a residential mortgage application triggers additional disclosure requirements. Disclosure
requirements vary depending on the federal law definition of an application. The federal laws that require
specific disclosure requirements relating to loan applications are: ECOA, FCRA, HMDA, RESPA and TILA. Also,
the SAFE Act requires that a person receiving an application must be registered and/or licensed under the
requirements of the Act.
The Uniform Residential Loan Application (URLA) is the Fannie Mae Form 1003 or the Freddie Mac Form 65.
2
Appraisal Forms (Fannie Mae Forms)
▪ Form 1004 – Uniform residential appraisal report (URAR) for an interior and exterior inspection of a
single unit property
▪ Form 1007 – Single family properties intended for investment purposes
▪ Form 1073 – Interior and exterior inspection of a single unit property in a condominium
▪ Form 2055 – External only appraisal (referred to as a “drive by”)
Appraisal Update
▪ An appraisal that is more than 4 months (120 days) old will require an updated appraisal
ECOA Appraisal Rules
▪ A notice of the right to receive a copy of the appraisal must be provided to the borrower within 3
business days of receiving the loan application.
▪ A copy of appraisal must be provided to clients promptly, but not later than 3 business days before
closing. Client is entitled to a copy even if they failed to pay for the appraisal.
▪ If a loan does not close, the client must still receive a copy of the appraisal within 30 days.
▪ A lender is not allowed to charge a borrower for a copy of the appraisal.
Dodd Frank Rules
▪ Borrowers must receive a copy of an appraisal promptly, but not less than 3 days before closing.
▪ Borrowers are no longer allowed to pay an appraiser at the door.
▪ Any person involved in loan production is prohibited from selecting the appraiser.
Fannie Mae Appraiser Requirements
Appraiser must:
▪ Be state-licensed or state certified
▪ Have a resume of knowledge and experience
▪ Have errors and omissions insurance policy, generally
3
Appraisal Rules & Definitions
Appraisal Independence and Integrity Rules
(12 CFR 1026.42)
The Dodd Frank Act transferred appraisal independence and integrity rules and required behaviors to the CFPB for
enforcement. These rules are covered under TILA 1026.42, including official interpretation available for each section.
These rules apply to valuations completed on a consumer’s primary dwelling.
Definitions
Term Definition
Covered person A creditor with respect to a covered transaction or a person that provides “settlement
42(a) services,” the term includes any service provided in connection with a real estate
settlement including, but not limited to, the following: title searches, title
examinations, the provision of title certificates, title insurance, services rendered by an
attorney, the preparation of documents, property surveys, the rendering of credit
reports or appraisals, pest and fungus inspections, services rendered by a real estate
agent or broker, the origination of a federally related mortgage loan (including, but
not limited to, the taking of loan applications, loan processing, and the underwriting
and funding of loans), and the handling of the processing, and closing or settlement;
as defined in 12 U.S.C. 2602(3)
Covered transaction An extension of consumer credit that is or will be secured by the consumer's
42 (b)(1) principal dwelling.
Valuation An estimate of the value of the consumer's principal dwelling in written or electronic
42(b)(2) form, other than one produced solely by an automated model or system.
Valuation • Recruiting, selecting, or retaining a person to prepare a valuation
management • Contracting with or employing a person to prepare a valuation
functions • Managing or overseeing the process of preparing a valuation, including by
42(b)(3) providing:
1. administrative services such as receiving orders and receiving a valuation,
2. submitting a completed valuation to creditors and underwriters
3. collecting fees from creditors and underwriters for services provided in
connection with a valuation, and compensating a person that
prepares valuations;
4. Reviewing or verifying the work of a person that prepares valuations.
Coercion In connection with a covered transaction, no covered person shall or shall attempt to
directly or indirectly cause the value assigned to the consumer's principal dwelling to
be based on any factor other than the independent judgment of a person that
prepares valuations, through coercion, extortion, inducement, bribery, or intimidation
of, compensation or instruction to, or collusion with a person that
prepares valuations or performs valuation management functions.
Below are important definitions from the law MLOs should know.
4
Violations
Examples of actions that violate coercion standards include:
• Seeking to influence a person that prepares a valuation to report a minimum or maximum value for
the consumer's principal dwelling.
• Withholding or threatening to withhold timely payment to a person that prepares a valuation or
performs valuation management functions because the person does not value the consumer's
principal dwelling at or above a certain amount
• Implying to a person that prepares valuations that current or future retention of the person depends on
the amount at which the person estimates the value of the consumer's principal dwelling
• Excluding a person that prepares a valuation from consideration for future engagement because
the person reports a value for the consumer's principal dwelling that does not meet or exceed a
predetermined threshold
• Conditioning the compensation paid to a person that prepares a valuation on consummation of
the covered transaction.
Mischaracterization of Value (42(c)(1)(i)
Any one associated with a covered transaction may not display:
• Misrepresentation (42(c)(1))
o Prepare valuations that materially misrepresent the value of the consumer's principal dwelling in
a valuation. A misrepresentation is material if it is likely to significantly affect the value assigned
to the consumer's principal dwelling. A bona fide error will not be a misrepresentation.
• Falsification or Alteration (42(c)(2)(i))
o Falsify and alter a valuation, unless that person prepares valuations. An alteration is material if
when changed it will likely affect the value assigned to the consumer's principal dwelling
significantly.
• Inducement of Mischaracterization
o Induce a person to violate the rules associated with independent valuations.
Permitted Actions (42(c)(2)(iii))
Examples of actions that do not violate independence and integrity rules include:
• Asking a person that prepares a valuation to consider additional, appropriate property information,
including information about comparable properties, to make or support a valuation
• Requesting that a person that prepares a valuation provide further detail, substantiation, or explanation
for the person's conclusion about the value of the consumer's principal dwelling
• Asking a person that prepares a valuation to correct errors in the valuation
• Obtaining multiple valuations for the consumer's principal dwelling to select the most reliable valuation
• Withholding compensation due to breach of contract or substandard performance of services
• Taking action permitted or required by applicable Federal or state statute, regulation, or agency
guidance.
Prohibition on Conflicts of Interest
Any person preparing a valuation or performing valuation management functions that may have a direct or
indirect interest, financial or otherwise, in the property or transaction for which the valuation is or will be
performed.
5
Employees and Affiliates
Employees and Affiliates of Creditors; Providers of Multiple Settlement Services (42(d)(1)(i))
A person does not violate this section based solely on the fact that the person:
• Is an employee or affiliate of the creditor
• Provides a settlement service in addition to preparing valuations
• Has a relationship with an affiliate who performs another settlement service or performs valuation management
functions
Employees and Affiliates of Creditors with Assets of More Than $250 Million for Both of The Past Two Calendar Years
(42(d)(1)(ii))
If a creditor had assets of more than $250 million as of December 31st for both of the past two calendar years,
a person subject to paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section who is employed by or affiliated with the creditor does not have a
conflict of interest in violation of paragraph (d)(1)(i)of this section based on the person's employment or affiliate
relationship with the creditor if:
• The compensation of the person preparing a valuation or performing valuation management functions is not
based on the value arrived at in any valuation
• The person preparing a valuation or performing valuation management functions reports to a person who is not
part of the creditor's loan production function, as defined in paragraph (d)(5)(i) of this section, and whose
compensation is not based on the closing of the transaction to which the valuation relates
(42(d)(2)(ii))
No employee, officer or director in the creditor's loan production function may be directly or indirectly involved in
selecting, retaining, recommending or influencing the selection of the person to prepare a valuation or perform valuation
management functions, or to be included in or excluded from a list of approved persons who prepare valuations or
perform valuation management functions.
EMPLOYEES AND AFFILIATES OF CREDITORS WITH ASSETS OF $250 MILLION OR LESS FOR EITHER OF THE PAST TWO
CALENDAR YEARS. (42(d)(2)(iii), 42(d)(2))
• For any covered transaction in which the creditor had assets of $250 million or less as of December 31st for
either of the past two calendar years, a person subject to paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section who is employed by
or affiliated with the creditor does not have a conflict of interest in violation of paragraph (d)(1)(i)of this section
based on the person's employment or affiliate relationship with the creditor if:
o The compensation of the person preparing a valuation or performing valuation management functions is
not based on the value arrived at in any valuation; and
o The creditor requires that any employee, officer or director of the creditor who orders, performs, or
reviews a valuation for a covered transaction abstains from participating in any decision to approve, not
approve, or set the terms of that transaction.
Loan production function. 42(d)(5)
The definition of a loan production function means an employee, officer, director, department, division, or other unit of a
creditor with responsibility for generating covered transactions, approving covered transactions, or both.
When extension of credit prohibited 42(d)(5)(i)
A creditor that knows, at or before consummation, of a violation in connection with a valuation may not extend credit
based on the valuation, unless the creditor has acted with reasonable diligence to determine that the valuation does not
materially misstate or misrepresent the value of the consumer's principal dwelling.
6
Appraisal services. 42(e)
The services required to perform an appraisal, include:
▪ defining the scope of work
▪ inspecting the property
▪ reviewing necessary and appropriate public and private data sources (for example, multiple listing
services, tax assessment records and public land records)
▪ developing and rendering an opinion of value, and preparing and submitting the appraisal report.
Appraisal Management Company
Any person authorized to perform one or more of the following actions on behalf of the creditor:
▪ Recruit, select, and retain fee appraisers
▪ Contract with fee appraisers to perform appraisal services
▪ Manage the process of having an appraisal performed, including providing administrative services such
as receiving appraisal orders and appraisal reports
▪ Submit completed appraisal reports to creditors and underwriters
▪ Collect fees from creditors and underwriters for services provided
▪ Compensate fee appraisers for services performed
▪ Review and verify the work of fee appraisers.
Mandatory Reporting
Any covered person that reasonably believes an appraiser has not complied with the Uniform Standards of
Professional Appraisal Practice or ethical or professional requirements for appraisers under applicable state or
Federal statutes or regulations should refer the matter to the appropriate state agency, if the failure to comply
is material. A failure to comply is material if it is likely to significantly affect the value assigned to
the consumer's principal dwelling.
Timing of Reporting. 42(g)(1)
A covered person must notify the appropriate state agency within a reasonable period of time after
the person determines that there is a reasonable basis to believe that a failure to comply is material and should
be reported.
7
8
