QUALIFIED
MORTGAGE
LOANS
What the heck are they?
▪
Types of Qualified Mortgages
▪
Higher Priced Mortgage Loans
▪
Non-Qualified Mortgages
▪
Sail into a Safe Harbor
▪
1
Edition v.120122 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
What
the heck
are
the y?
Background: General Benefits: Primary Benefits:
The Dodd-Frank Act set standards Consumers are protected The rule specifically
for qualified mortgages and non- against unduly risky provides the presumption
qualified mortgages. features. that creditors that originate
Qualified mortgages differ from Creditors have more a qualified mortgage have
non-qualified mortgages in that certainty against complied with the ATR
the loan will NOT contain risky potential liability. requirement which means
features. Qualified mortgages are courts will treat a case
good for both consumers and for differently if a consumer
the lenders that originate them. files an ATR claim.
A borrower received a loan from a creditor. The borrower, in a conversation with
the loan originator during the application interview, discussed that he drove 85
miles each way to work. That was not a factor in the loan decision because the
· borrower qualified based on the traditional ATR criteria. A year later the borrower
E
· had an accident and the insurance did not cover all the repairs.
S
·
A The borrower lost time from work and subsequently was terminated. He sued the
· lender claiming that the lender did not meet the ATR requirement because the
C
distance to work should have been a consideration. The lender prevailed because
the borrower had received a qualified mortgage and the presumption that the ATR
had been met was not up for challenge in the court.
2
Types of Qualified Mortgages
Can be originated Can be originated by small creditors
by ALL lenders operating primarily in rural areas
Qualified Mortgage Features and Limitations
No negative amortization
Interest portion of the payment must be covered
No interest only
A portion of the payment must be allocated to principal
Points and fee thresholds change yearly. Current maximum 30-year loan term fees are:
Points/Fees Loan Amount
Limited to 3% ≥ $124,331
$3,730 ≥ $74,599 and < $124,331
5% ≥ $24,866 and < $74,599
$1,243 ≥ $15,541 and < $24,866
8% < $15,541
Underwriting Requirements vary by qualified mortgage (see next page).
3
Types of Qualified Mortgages
UNDERWRITING
GUIDELINES
G
eneral
▪ Must qualify borrower using the maximum rate potential within first five
years:
o If the rate has the potential to increase the maximum rate must be used to
qualify.
▪ Limits based on a loan’s pricing:
o For first liens with loan amounts ≥ $124,331, the annual percentage rate (APR) may not
exceed the average prime offer rate (APOR) for a comparable transaction by 2.25 or more
percentage points as of the date the interest rate is set.
▪ Loans must meet a full amortization schedule:
o The qualifying payment must be the payment that will pay off the loan by the
loan’s due date.
Seasoned
To meet seasoned QM eligibility requirements and to receive a safe harbor from ATR liability
at the end of the 36-month seasoning period, the loan must meet the following criteria:
▪ Secured by a first lien with a maximum 30-year loan term
▪ H as a fixed rate, with regular equal periodic payments, fully amortizing and no balloon
payments
▪ Is not subject to the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act
▪ Points and fees do not exceed the 3% threshold (or other applicable limit)
▪ Creditor must consider the consumer’s debt-to-income ratio or residual income, income
or assets, other than the value of the dwelling, and debts, and verify the consumer’s
income or assets, other than the value of the dwelling, and the consumer’s debts, using
t he same consider and verify requirements established for general QMs in the general
QM rule.
▪ There must have been no more than two delinquencies of 30 or more days and no
d elinquencies of 60 or more days at the end of the seasoning period
4
Types of Qualified Mortgages
Small
Creditor & Balloon
Small creditor and balloon payment qualified mortgages are primarily for rural
and underserved areas where the preservation of available financing is the
highest priority.
Only lenders that meet the asset and loan activity criteria are eligible to provide
these categories of qualified mortgages. The following is a sample of the criteria:
▪ Loans must have a fixed interest rate.
▪ Loan term is 5 years or longer.
▪ The small lender must hold the loan for three years unless selling the loan to
another small lender.
▪ More than 50 percent of mortgages originated must be secured by properties
designated as rural or underserved. (Note: Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau publishes this list.)
5
Higher Priced Mortgage Loans (HPML)
HPML are loans that allow interest rates to exceed a predetermined threshold based
on the Average Prime Offer Rate (APOR) and a fixed interest rate standard.
What does that mean?
From a risk perspective, a Qualified Mortgage that is a Higher Priced Mortgage Loan
(HPML) allows the borrower to challenge if the Ability to Repay was met.
What determines HPML loans?
Loan Exceeds APOR By ___%
If the rate is locked and the APOR is 1st lien loan Exceeds APOR By 1.5%
exceeded as shown in table:
1st jumbo loan Exceeds APOR By 2.5%
2nd lien loan Exceed APOR By 3.5%
E A lender offered a borrower a qualified mortgage for $200,000 at 5.5% on a
·
first lien. At the time the loan was locked, the APOR was 4%.
L
·
P
This is a HPML loan because the rate offered exceeds the APOR by 1.5% for a
·
M
first lien loan. The borrower would be able to challenge in court that the ATR
·
was not met.
A
·
X
·
E
6
Safe Harbor
Non-Qualified Mortgage.
These are mortgages that meet
If a consumer closes on a loan that is a qualified
the Ability to Repay
mortgage and is not a HPML (higher priced
requirement however, they are
mortgage loan), then the consumer is
allowed to have risky features
considered to be in the Safe Harbor region.
such as:
Safe Harbor means the presumption that the
QM (qualified mortgage) meets ATR (Ability to ▪ Negative amortization
Repay) requirements and cannot be challenged. ▪ Interest only
▪ Terms greater than 30 years
Because of this, a court will conclusively
▪ Fees that exceed the QM
presume the loan complies with the ATR
threshold
requirements.
Lenders that choose to originate
these loans do NOT have the
N on-Safe Harbor
presumption that the Ability to
Repay has been met and are
open to challenge by the
Qualified mortgage loans that are Higher Priced consumer in court.
Mortgage Loans (HPML) are open for dispute.
Because of the risk involved
The consumer is able to challenge in court
non-qualified mortgage loans
(rebut the presumption) that the qualified
carry higher interest rates and
mortgage meets the Ability to Repay
less favorable terms.
requirements.
Ultimately, the court will decide.
NOTE:
If the annual percentage rate (APR) does not exceed the average prime offer rate (APOR) for a comparable
tra nsaction by 1.5 percentage points or more as of the date the interest rate is set, then the loan is in Safe Harbor.
A f irst-lien loan receives a “rebuttable presumption” (borrower can challenge in court) that the consum er had the ability to
re pay if the APR exceeds the APOR for a comparable transaction by 1.5 percentage points or more but by less than 2.25
pe rcentage points. This loan is possibly in Non-Safe Harbor.
7
8
