6/16/23, 2:32 PM Courses
Part 1: 15 Hour Portion - 10 Day Course
29. Module 10 Quiz
< Back Next >
Date - 06/16/23 5:27 PM
Total Questions: 10 | Grade Based On: Number Correct | Passing Score: 7 | Questions Correct: 10
Question 1:
Question:
A loan originator provided a flyer to an agent for an open house and the flyer contained a monthly principal
and interest payment amount. Which of the following would not be required?
Answer (Correct): The interest rate
Feedback: The flyer must contain the down payment, loan term and APR. The interest rate is not required if
the APR is disclosed.
Question 2:
Question:
Fraud for housing is one of the two major divisions of fraud in the mortgage industry. What is the other?
Answer (Correct): Fraud for profit
Feedback: Fraud for profit is often committed with the complicity of insiders.
Question 3:
Question:
If an advertisement has a teaser or introductory rate that is less than the fully indexed rate the following is
required:
Answer (Correct): Disclose the rate based on the index and margin at the time of the loan
Feedback: The teaser rate is lower than the fully index rate therefore advertisement must conform to this
guideline.
Question 4:
Question:
A loan originator can be accused of steering if:
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310006 1/3
6/16/23, 2:32 PM Courses
Answer (Correct): He directs or “steers” a consumer to consummate a transaction based on the fact that he
will receive greater compensation.
Feedback: Whenever a loan originator steers a consumer to a loan transaction that is in the loan originator's
personal financial interest this is considered steering.
Question 5:
Question:
A nominee loan is:
Answer (Correct): A loan made to one individual in which the proceeds of the loan benefit another individual
without the knowledge of the lender
Feedback: When a lender is unaware that proceeds from a loan will benefit another person, this is referred to
a nominee loan.
Question 6:
Question:
A fraudster agrees to show investors how to gain wealth by investing in multiple properties by acquiring
loans with different lenders at the same time without disclosing the intent to purchase other properties. This is
known as:
Answer (Correct): Chunking
Feedback: This activity enables investors to build wealth by acquiring multiple properties by obtaining
financing from different lenders simultaneously.
Question 7:
Question:
What is the potential penalty for mortgage fraud?
Answer (Correct): 30 years in prison and $1,000,000 fine
Feedback: The federal penalty for fraud is 30 years in prison and $1,000,000 fine
Question 8:
Question:
Two companies establish a joint business venture. Which would be considered a “sham affiliated business
arrangement"?
Answer (Correct): One company is in the lead creation business and the other company originates real estate
loans
Feedback: The company in the lead generation business is not performing an additional service. They are
leveraging their relationship to circumvent RESPA Section 8 by receiving payment for referrals.
Question 9:
Question:
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310006 2/3
6/16/23, 2:32 PM Courses
A closing attorney owns a building and a tenant is a mortgage broker who refers clients to the attorney.
Which of the following is a RESPA violation?
Answer (Correct): Providing the space to the broker at a discounted rate.
Feedback: An advantage an attorney would provide to a mortgage broker would be an unfair, unearned thing
of value.
Question 10:
Question:
A property surveyor has appreciated the business that an MLO has been referring to him to survey clients’
properties. The following would not be allowed under RESPA:
Answer (Correct): Let the MLO spend a weekend in the surveyor’s resort condo but ensure that no money is
involved in the gesture
Feedback: A referral does not require money. It can include other things such as a stay at a condo.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310006 3/3
