6/15/23, 10:11 PM Courses
Part 1: 15 Hour Portion - 10 Day Course
13. Module 4 Quiz
< Back Next >
Date - 06/16/23 1:10 AM
Total Questions: 10 | Grade Based On: Number Correct | Passing Score: 7 | Questions Correct: 10
Question 1:
Question:
Why is non-taxable income increased by 125% for income qualifying purposes?
Answer (Correct): It makes it equivalent to gross income
Feedback: Because ECOA does not allow a lender to discriminate based on income, it is unlawful to qualify
an applicant using gross income, (which includes social security, Medicare, and withholding) and another
applicant using non-taxable income (which does not have the taxable items included). For that reason, non-
taxable income is increased by 125%.
Question 2:
Question:
When is a payment cycle not relevant to calculating gross monthly income?
Answer (Correct): When annual or monthly income can be determined without knowing the pay cycle
Feedback: If there is a way to a calculate income without knowing the pay cycle then the pay cycle is not
needed. Knowing the borrower’s hourly rate, number of hours worked in the week is enough to calculate
monthly gross income. The pay cycle is not important.
Question 3:
Question:
For manually underwritten loans there are DTI limits for different loan programs. Identify those limits for
FHA, VA and Conventional in that order.
Answer (Correct): 43%,41%,36%
Feedback: Remember that DTI includes the housing payment.
Question 4:
Question:
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310022 1/3
6/15/23, 10:11 PM Courses
If a borrower is considered an employee for qualification purposes, then the processor will not require the
following to verify income and employment status:
Answer (Correct): Contributions to the church – past two years
Feedback: Religious contributions have no bearing on income and employment. Any such inquiry would
violate the provisions of ECOA.
Question 5:
Question:
Housing payments are generally defined as PI, PITI or PITIA. What would need to be added to the PI portion
of the payment to reach PITIA?
Answer (Correct): Taxes, property related insurance and a special assessment like HOA fee
Feedback: The second "I" in PITI is property related insurance, like hazard insurance, fire insurance and
flood insurance. "A" refers to special assessment like Homeowners Association. (HOA).
Question 6:
Question:
Non-employee income must meet the three year continuance test. Which of the following does not meet this
test?
Answer (Correct): Annual teaching employment contract
Feedback: The annual teaching employment contract does not require the 3-year test because the borrower is
an employee. All the other forms of income (alimony, child support, social security) are non-employment
based income and will need to meet the 3-year continuance test.
Question 7:
Question:
The following would not be income from non-employment activities:
Answer (Correct): Salary
Feedback: Salary is employment-based income.
Question 8:
Question:
The three year continuance rule is important when using income associated with a child because:
Answer (Correct): Children related income generally ends at age 18
Feedback: Since child related income generally ends at age 18, income related to a child already 15 at the
time of application is not available for qualifying income because it will expire within 3 years.
Question 9:
Question:
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310022 2/3
6/15/23, 10:11 PM Courses
What item is not included in gross monthly income?
Answer (Correct): Child care
Feedback: Gross monthly income include income before deductions. Child care is not one of those
deductions.
Question 10:
Question:
Sometimes employed individuals are considered self-employed. Which of the following would not be
considered self-employed for purposes of mortgage loan financing?
Answer (Correct): Receives 10% bonus annually
Feedback: Someone receiving a 10% annual bonus would not be considered self-employed because this
percentage does not meet the 25% threshold. Employees qualified as self-employed must provide two years
of filed tax returns.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310022 3/3
