6/16/23, 2:11 PM Courses
Part 1: 15 Hour Portion - 10 Day Course
20. Module 7 Quiz
< Back Next >
Date - 06/16/23 5:05 PM
Total Questions: 10 | Grade Based On: Number Correct | Passing Score: 7 | Questions Correct: 10
Question 1:
Question:
After securing a mortgage to finance her dream home, a borrower found herself unemployed suddenly.
Unfortunately, she became delinquent on her mortgage payments after several months. She has maintained
regular contact with her servicer throughout her dilemma. What responsibility does the servicer have to
remain compliant with RESPA guidelines?
Answer (Correct): The servicer must send the borrower written notification of her loan payment delinquency
by the thirty-sixth day
Feedback: A servicer must notify a borrower of any delinquency by the 36th day of the delinquency on the
loan payment.
Question 2:
Question:
During the transfer of servicing, the consumer is protected by which of the following?
Answer (Correct): The servicer is not allowed to charge a late fee during the 60 days beginning with the date
of transfer if the payment was made by the due date and sent to the previous servicer.
Feedback: If the borrower submits their payment to the original servicer in error, then the servicer is unable
to assess a late fee during the 60 days starting on the transfer date as long as the payment was made by the
due date.
Question 3:
Question:
Which of the following statements is true about a shortage in a borrower’s escrow account greater than one
month’s escrow?
Answer (Correct): The servicer may allow the borrower to pay the shortage in equal payments over the next
12 months.
Feedback: The borrower must be given an opportunity to repay the shortage over a 12 month period in 12
equal payments.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310015 1/3
6/16/23, 2:11 PM Courses
Question 4:
Question:
A year and a half ago a borrower purchased a home as a short sale. He was downsized from his company
within the past five months resulting in him falling behind on his mortgage payments for the past 90 days. He
has since secured employment, but is still struggling to remain current. The servicer may NOT:
Answer (Correct): Start foreclosure proceeding based on a 90-day mortgage payment delinquency
Feedback: A servicer may not make the first notice or filing required by applicable law for any judicial or
non-judicial foreclosure process unless a borrower's mortgage loan obligation is more than 120 days
delinquent.
Question 5:
Question:
On October 3, 2015, RESPA Sections 4 and 5 were amended to require lenders and brokers originating
mortgage loans to provide borrowers with certain disclosures (Goodfaith Estimate and HUD 1 Settlement
statement) based on certain criteria. Which does NOT apply?
Answer (Correct): A regional lender that originates at least 100 loans on an annual basis
Feedback: If a creditor makes 5 or fewer loans annually or reverse mortgages, then they will be required to
provide borrowers with a Goodfaith Estimate and a HUD 1 Settlement statement under RESPA.
Question 6:
Question:
When a borrower makes a qualified written request to a servicer relating to servicing of the borrower’s loan,
the servicer must meet certain requirements. The servicer must:
Answer (Correct): Notify the borrower in writing acknowledging receipt of the request within 5 days
Feedback: Within 5 business days of a servicer receiving a written request from the borrower for information
relating to the servicing of the loan, the servicer must provide to the borrower a written response
acknowledging receipt of the qualified written response.
Question 7:
Question:
A servicer that receives the transfer of a loan must notify the borrower of the effective date of transfer:
Answer (Correct): Within 15 days after the transfer
Feedback: The receiving servicer must deliver the Notice of Transfer to the borrower no more than 15 days
after the effective date of the transfer.
Question 8:
Question:
There are two conditions that would trigger the requirement for the Affiliated Business Arrangement
Disclosure (ABA). Which of the following is not one of those conditions?
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310015 2/3
6/16/23, 2:11 PM Courses
Answer (Correct): Referring the borrower to service providers that the lender has used in the past
Feedback: To trigger the ABA disclosure there must be a conflicting relationship either through a greater
than 1% ownership or an associate relationship that is not arms-length between the parties.
Question 9:
Question:
An annual escrow account statement showed an overage of $150. What is the lender required to do?
Answer (Correct): Disburse the overage to the borrower within 30 days
Feedback: For overages more than $50, the servicer must refund the amount to the borrower within 30 days.
Question 10:
Question:
It has been at least two years since a MLO returned to the mortgage industry and she is now a mortgage
broker. To ensure she has multiple streams of income, she is a fifty percent co-owner of a processing
company established to assist other brokers and lenders in her area. She verbally discloses to her customers
that she originates her own loans and uses her company to process files for her company and others. After
being in business as a mortgage broker for a year, she was audited by a regulatory authority and fined for
failure to disclose specific information. Of the choices, which is the most likely offense?
Answer (Correct): Failed to disclose the Affiliated Business Arrangement disclosure based on her ownership
interest in both companies
Feedback: Regardless of size or how information is shared about the percentage of ownership of 1% or
more, an entity must provide the Affiliated Business Arrangement disclosure to borrowers .
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310015 3/3
