6/16/23, 2:04 PM Courses
Part 1: 15 Hour Portion - 10 Day Course
5. Module 1 Quiz
< Back Next >
Date - 06/16/23 5:01 PM
Total Questions: 10 | Grade Based On: Number Correct | Passing Score: 7 | Questions Correct: 10
Question 1:
Question:
Residential real estate financing includes legal documents that relate to the borrower’s promise to pay and
also documents that relate to the collateral for the loan. The following item would NOT be an instrument used
for collateral.
Answer (Correct): Improvements
Feedback: Improvements means that the property has a dwelling on it which is the security for the loan. The
instruments that are documented in court house records that are security instruments are the mortgage and
deed of trust which result in a lien on the property when these security instruments are recorded.
Question 2:
Question:
Identify the entity that insures a loan and is not considered private.
Answer (Correct): FHA
Feedback: FHA insures loans and is a government ageny
Question 3:
Question:
A large lender closes on average 2,000 residential loan transactions per month. These loans are then packaged
in pools as securitized instruments for sale to investment firms and other entities. What is this vehicle called?
Answer (Correct): Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS)
Feedback: Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS) is correct because it is an investment vehicle secured by the
principal and interest payments from borrowers on residential real estate.
Question 4:
Question:
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310030 1/3
6/16/23, 2:04 PM Courses
The person that is hired to provide clerical and support duties and verifies information on the loan application
is the mortgage loan_________.
Answer (Correct): processor
Feedback: A processor is an independent set of eyes that verifies the information on the loan application.
Question 5:
Question:
A MLO will have her first loan closing on Friday. The borrower has a 5/1 ARM conventional loan with no
pre-payment penalty. The buyer’s real estate agent inquired if she will attend the closing. Which of the
following is the correct response?
Answer (Correct): Although preferable, a MLO is not required to attend the closing
Feedback: A MLO is not required to attend the closing is correct because attendance is not mandated by
federal or state laws. It is up to MLOs and/or their sponsor’s discretion.
Question 6:
Question:
At a recent house warming party, a guest inquiries about the type of loan a homeowner has from his lender.
The homeowner explained his loan is guaranteed for a certain percentage in the event of default and as a first-
time homeowner with zero down he was required to pay a funding fee. Which of the following best describes
the category of loan he has?
Answer (Correct): VA Loan
Feedback: Correct! The homeowner is a veteran who has a VA loan. This would not be a FHA loan as the
loan is guaranteed and he’s paying a funding fee.
Question 7:
Question:
There is a difference between residential and commercial financing. Identify the answer that would not be a
part of residential real-estate financing.
Answer (Correct): 6 unit property
Feedback: Residential real-estate financing is limited to 4 types of dwellings: o Single Unit o Duplex o
Triplex o Quadraplex
Question 8:
Question:
A mortgage broker has just become a conventional mortgage lender underwriting loans that will meet the
loan underwriting conditions of two banking institutions. The new lender received a line of credit to fund
loans and will not service loans and will sell his loans to the banks whose underwriting conditions he is
meeting. Which of the following would NOT be associated with this lender?
Answer (Correct): Mortgage insurance premium
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310030 2/3
6/16/23, 2:04 PM Courses
Feedback: Mortgage insurance premium is associated with FHA and this lender is only originating
conventional products. The line of credit he received is called a warehouse line of credit. Because the lender
will not be servicing loans, will sell loans to banks to meet their underwriting conditions and will need a
warehouse line of credit, he is considered a correspondent lender.
Question 9:
Question:
A new MLO was overheard explaining to his co-worker about different types of loan programs. In one case
he stated that loans that exceed $726,200 for the current year, as established by the Federal Housing Finance
Board loan limit, are considered conforming loans. Is he correct?
Answer (Correct): No. Loan amounts equal to or less than $726,200 are conforming loans.
Feedback: Conforming loans are less than or equal to $726,200. Loan amounts above $726,200 are
considered non-conforming meaning they exceed the threshold for loan limits as established by the Federal
Housing Finance Board which publishes this figure on an annual basis.
Question 10:
Question:
A borrower has just committed to the terms of the loan by signing the following document:
Answer (Correct): Note
Feedback: When the promissory note is signed the borrower has committed to the terms of the loan.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310030 3/3
