6/16/23, 2:43 PM Courses
Part 1: 15 Hour Portion - 10 Day Course
32. Module 11 Quiz
< Back Next >
Date - 06/16/23 5:42 PM
Total Questions: 10 | Grade Based On: Number Correct | Passing Score: 7 | Questions Correct: 10
Question 1:
Question:
A prospective homeowner contacts a mortgage company to begin the qualification process to purchase a
home. The person on the other end of the call collects key pieces of information, such as income, assets and
liabilities. In less than 30 minutes, the prospective homeowner was quoted an interest rate and estimated
monthly mortgage payments. Which of the following best describes the person providing the information?
Answer (Correct): A state licensed MLO
Feedback: A state licensed MLO can work for a mortgage company and is not an employee of a depository
institution. In addition, MLOs are the only entities that can provide terms for a residential loan application
which would eliminate the processor or underwriter as plausible options in this scenario.
Question 2:
Question:
Which of the following statements is incorrect relating to how the SAFE Act defines the term 'loan
processor'?
Answer (Correct): A person who performs clerical and support duties and advertises that he also originates
Feedback: Loan processors cannot advertise themselves as originators without being licensed.
Question 3:
Question:
A mortgage professional’s primary function involves reviewing the accuracy and authenticity of supporting
documents for mortgage files on behalf of several originators employed by a number of lenders before
submitting them to underwriters for review. On occasion, this same mortgage professional also originates
loans for compensation. The mortgage professional must be:
Answer (Correct): An independent contractor
Feedback: A professional in this capacity can provide clerical duties on behalf of many MLOs employed by
different companies. To originate loans and process files in this context requires the individual to be a
licensed MLO.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310003 1/3
6/16/23, 2:43 PM Courses
Question 4:
Question:
An individual who desires to pursue a career in the residential mortgage industry has a unique identifier
number, therefore the following is true:
Answer (Correct): Considered a state licensed originator and must complete pre-license and mandated annual
continuing education
Feedback: Mandated pre-license and continuing education requirements are pre-requisites to becoming a
state licensed mortgage loan originator and maintaining license status.
Question 5:
Question:
An applicant for a mortgage license had a battery felony conviction five years earlier. The battery charge is
the only criminal activity on his record. Prior to applying for his license, he accessed his credit report from a
third-party credit report site which did not reveal any late or delinquent payments in the past 5 years. He did
uncover his credit scores were all above 700 points. He has worked in retail most of his career and decided to
join the mortgage industry recently. Which of the following would prevent him from being licensed?
Answer (Correct): Felony conviction in the last 7 years
Feedback: Although the applicant was charged with a felony for battery and not fraud five years ago, the
conviction was a felony which is within the specified timeframe as outlined under the SAFE Act.
Question 6:
Question:
It is time to take continuing education (CE) to meet annual licensing requirements and a MLO is conflicted
about whether to take CE with the course provider he used last year. Does he have a reason for concern?
Answer (Correct): No. As long as the approved course is not the same as the previous year he will not have
an issue.
Feedback: The MLO may not take the same approved course in successive years, but he can use the same
course provider each year.
Question 7:
Question:
In response to the mortgage crisis of 2008, then President Bush signed into law legislation to combat fraud in
consumer mortgage financing. A few years later, an entity assumed responsibility for the enforcement of this
piece of legislation. What specific law and which agency has responsibility for ensuring compliance by
residential mortgage professionals?
Answer (Correct): SAFE Act and CFPB
Feedback: The SAFE Act, which is also Title V of H.E.R.A, is the specific law that mandates residential
mortgage professionals comply with legislative guidelines. It is enforced by the Consumer Finance Protection
Bureau (CFPB).
Question 8:
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310003 2/3
6/16/23, 2:43 PM Courses
Question:
Which of the following statements is true under the S.A.F.E. Act relating to the surety bond, net worth or
state fund requirements?
Answer (Correct): States determine the net worth, surety bond or state fund requirements
Feedback: Choosing either a bond, net worth or state fund is mandated at the state level.
Question 9:
Question:
The SAFE Act minimum education requirement include the following EXCEPT:
Answer (Correct): If an individual fails the test, they will be able to retake the test up to 4 times within a 120
day period
Feedback: An individual who fails the qualified written test may retake it up to three consecutive times. The
person must wait at least 30 days between each retesting. The test may only be TAKEN three consecutive
times before waiting the 6-month period.
Question 10:
Question:
A licensed MLO decides to deactivate her license to raise a family. Which of the following statements is
correct?
Answer (Correct): If she completely leaves the industry and returns within 5 years she will not be required to
retake the test.
Feedback: An MLO may be inactive up to 5 years without having to retake the test when they return to the
industry. If they return after 5 years, they will be required to pass the national exam, again, as part of the
license reinstatement process. Please note, some states may establish different reinstatement rules other than
those stated under the SAFE Act.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310003 3/3
