6/15/23, 9:23 PM Courses
Part 1: 15 Hour Portion - 10 Day Course
10. Module 3 Quiz
< Back Next >
Date - 06/09/23 10:54 PM
Total Questions: 10 | Grade Based On: Number Correct | Passing Score: 7 | Questions Correct: 10
Question 1:
Question:
The following identifying information is not required for the Customer Identification Program (CIP).
Answer (Correct): Gender
Feedback: At a minimum, the bank must obtain the following identifying information from each customer
before opening the account. Name Date of birth for individuals Address Identification number Gender
is not a required item.
Question 2:
Question:
The Bank Secrecy Act addresses:
Answer (Correct): money laundering
Feedback: The Bank Secrecy Act tracks reporting of more than $10,0000 in cash to assist in avoiding money
laundering.
Question 3:
Question:
Credit scores range from:
Answer (Correct): 300 to 850
Feedback: The FICO scoring system is 300 - 850
Question 4:
Question:
FINCEN is:
Answer (Correct): Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310025 1/3
6/15/23, 9:23 PM Courses
Feedback: FinCen is the vehicle used by the FBI to publish fraud statistics
Question 5:
Question:
The following item is not directly addressed by GLBA and related laws:
Answer (Correct): Identity theft
Feedback: Identity theft is associated directly with FACTA
Question 6:
Question:
The USA PATRIOT Act has a program that is designed to provide specific information to financial
institutions to protect against terrorism and money laundering. What is this program?
Answer (Correct): Customer Identification Program
Feedback: The Customer Identification Program (CIP) requires financial institutions to collect names,
addresses and an identifying numbers, like a social security number or date of birth, for those applying for
loans.
Question 7:
Question:
The following statement is not correct relating to the Red Flag program:
Answer (Correct): A mortgage broker is exempt from red flag requirements
Feedback: A mortgage broker is not exempt from the Red Flag program.
Question 8:
Question:
The Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act (FACTA) is associated with all of the following except:
Answer (Correct): FTC created the Safeguard rule to support the provisions of FCRA
Feedback: The Safeguard rule is associated with the GLBA, not FACTA.
Question 9:
Question:
What is the Safeguard Rule?
Answer (Correct): A rule issued by the FTC that requires companies to have measures to keep customer
information safe
Feedback: The Safeguard rule is a rule issued by the FTC that requires companies to have measures to keep
customer information safe.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310025 2/3
6/15/23, 9:23 PM Courses
Question 10:
Question:
A consumer reporting agency must do the following once they receive a verified call indicating fraud against
a consumer for whom the consumer reporting agency maintains a file:
Answer (Correct): Include a fraud alert in the file of that consumer and also provide that alert along with any
credit score generated in using that file for a period of not less than 1 year beginning on the date of the
request
Feedback: Include a fraud alert in the file of that consumer and also provide that alert along with any credit
score generated in using that file for a period of not less than 1 year beginning on the date of the request.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310025 3/3
