6/15/23, 10:32 PM Courses
Part 1: 15 Hour Portion - 10 Day Course
18. Module 6 Quiz - END OF DAY 4
< Back Next >
Date - 06/16/23 1:30 AM
Total Questions: 10 | Grade Based On: Number Correct | Passing Score: 7 | Questions Correct: 10
Question 1:
Question:
A construction loan has the following characteristics except:
Answer (Correct): Referred to as a construction-perm loan
Feedback: A construction loan is only used for the period of construction. The construction-perm loan
includes permanent financing and only one closing transaction.
Question 2:
Question:
Non-traditional loan transactions have the following characteristics except:
Answer (Correct): The SAFE Act defines non-traditional loans as any loan that does not have a fixed rate
Feedback: The SAFE Act defines non-traditional loans as any loan that is not a 30 year fixed rate loan.
Question 3:
Question:
An interest only loan has the following characteristics except:
Answer (Correct): Is considered a fully amortized loan
Feedback: A fully amortized loan is a loan where the payments will pay off the loan by the due date. Interest
only loans will not make any contribution to the principal.
Question 4:
Question:
A home equity loan has the following characteristics except:
Answer (Correct): Is generally in primary (first lien) position
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310017 1/3
6/15/23, 10:32 PM Courses
Feedback: Home Equity loans are generally secondary loans which are subordinate to the primary (first lien)
loans.
Question 5:
Question:
An adjustable rate loan has the following characteristics except:
Answer (Correct): The index is under the control of the lender
Feedback: The index is a market instrument that is not under the control of any entity. It is the basis for rate
change in ARM loans.
Question 6:
Question:
Loan assumption transactions have the following characteristics except:
Answer (Correct): Loans that have a due on sale clause have limited loan assumption potential
Feedback: Loans that have a due on sale clause are not eligible for a loan assumption
Question 7:
Question:
A negative amortization loan has the following characteristics except:
Answer (Correct): Negative amortization means that the loan balance will remain consistent with interest
only payments
Feedback: The loan balance with interest only payments remains the same and the loan balance with
negative amortization increases.
Question 8:
Question:
In an ARM loan there are factors that cause the rate to change or has an impact on the rate changing. The
following term would not fit this description:
Answer (Correct): Combination of the index and the cap
Feedback: The index plus the CAP is not the interest rate. The index plus the margin is the interest rate. The
caps limit the degree of rate change.
Question 9:
Question:
Reverse mortgages have the following characteristics except:
Answer (Correct): Borrowers are not responsible for taxes and insurance payments
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310017 2/3
6/15/23, 10:32 PM Courses
Feedback: With a reverse mortgage, borrowers must have means testing and are responsible for their taxes
and insurance payments.
Question 10:
Question:
Refinance loan transactions have the following characteristics except:
Answer (Correct): A rate and term refinance transaction carries the highest degree of risk.
Feedback: A rate and term refinance transaction is the lowest risk refinance transaction because the impact on
the equity position is minimal as the borrower is being put into a better position. A cash-out refinance carries
the highest risk with the highest interest rates, lowest loan-to-value (LTV) and most unfavorable terms.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310017 3/3
