6/15/23, 10:37 PM Courses
Part 2: 5 Hour Portion - 10 Day Course
4. Module 2 Quiz
< Back Next >
Date - 06/16/23 1:34 AM
Total Questions: 10 | Grade Based On: Number Correct | Passing Score: 7 | Questions Correct: 10
Question 1:
Question:
Which of the following is NOT true about a mortgage?
Answer (Correct): A mortgage is a promise to pay a debt
Feedback: A mortgage is a voluntary lien that conveys security interest in a property to a lender or mortgagee
that is recorded. A note is a promise to pay a debt.
Question 2:
Question:
While preparing for the mortgage pre-license exam an individual was attempting to recall the difference
between a mortgage and a deed of trust. Which choice is correct?
Answer (Correct): The deed of trust involves three parties
Feedback: While a mortgage and deed of trust are both Instruments that shows the real estate as security for
the loan, a mortgage involves only two parties – the borrower and mortgagor or lender. A deed of trust
involves three parties – the borrower who signs the security instrument, the third party who is the trustee and
the lender who is the beneficiary.
Question 3:
Question:
When a property is sold in a foreclosure sale for less than the loan amount securing the property, this means
the borrower still owes the balance. What can the lender do to assist in obtaining payment?
Answer (Correct): Seek a deficiency judgment
Feedback: A deficiency judgment allows a lender to collect any outstanding amount due after a foreclosure
sale.
Question 4:
Question:
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310041 1/3
6/15/23, 10:37 PM Courses
A veteran who is deployed oversees would like to refinance his home to take advantage of the lower interest
rates. Before leaving he signs a general power of attorney and leaves his wife in charge of his finances. Based
on this scenario, what is the best option?
Answer (Correct): The lender will require the veteran to execute a specific power of attorney that is
designated for a defined real estate transaction prior to settlement
Feedback: Most lenders will require a specific power of attorney to close real estate transactions.
Question 5:
Question:
Which of the following statements is true?
Answer (Correct): A promissory note is evidence of a promise to pay a debt
Feedback: A promissory note is not the same as the security instrument like a mortgage or deed of trust. It is
a document the borrower signs acknowledging their promise to repay a debt (IOU) and it is not recorded in
the county court house records.
Question 6:
Question:
During the settlement process a lender requires a borrower to sign the security instrument and to ensure they
will receive payment in full for the amount of the loan.
What document transfers interest to a lender as a pledge of repayment until satisfaction of the debt?
Answer (Correct): Note
Feedback: Not to be confused with the mortgage or deed of trust, a note is an agreement between the lender
and the borrower that requires the borrower to repay the debt. The mortgage is the security instrument which
is separate from the note.
Question 7:
Question:
When the borrower retains both equitable and legal title to the property, the following is true:
Answer (Correct): The transaction has taken place in a Lien Theory state
Feedback: It will be more difficult for a lender to foreclose on a homeowner in a Lien Theory state where the
lender must first secure a judgment from a court to begin foreclosure proceedings.
Question 8:
Question:
A new prospective buyer is anxious about becoming a homeowner for the first time. The process has been
overwhelming, but she will soon achieve her dream of homeownership. During the last couple of weeks she
has encountered a number of people. Who will she likely interact with on the final day of the transaction?
Answer (Correct): A closing agent executes documents related to finalizing the transaction including the
collection and distribution of funds and recording of the documents
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310041 2/3
6/15/23, 10:37 PM Courses
Feedback: A closing agent, also known as a settlement agent, is an impartial third party that oversees the
finalization of a real estate transaction. Closing agents are either a title company, escrow agent, attorney, or
notary.
Question 9:
Question:
Purchaser A and Purchaser B decide to purchase an investment property to generate additional income and
tax benefits. They have separate families and want any financial benefit from their investment to remain with
their designated families upon death. In what manner should the title of the property be held?
Answer (Correct): Tenants in common
Feedback: As long as title to the property is held in this manner any financial benefit will be passed on to the
heirs of the property owner upon their passing.
Question 10:
Question:
A warranty deed is a legal, written document in which the seller warrants that the title to the real estate to be
sold is good and salable. The person conveying an interest in the property must sign the deed and is called
the:
Answer (Correct): Grantor
Feedback: The Seller signs the Deed and is the Grantor.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310041 3/3
