6/16/23, 2:26 PM Courses
Part 1: 15 Hour Portion - 10 Day Course
23. Module 8 Quiz
< Back Next >
Date - 06/16/23 5:18 PM
Total Questions: 10 | Grade Based On: Number Correct | Passing Score: 7 | Questions Correct: 10
Question 1:
Question:
At a meeting to complete a loan application a borrower received a quote of 6.03% APR associated with a
mortgage transaction. On the day of settlement, the APR decreased to 4.95% APR. How would you interpret
what has transpired with this transaction?
Answer (Correct): Any change in APR more than .125% above or below a percent of the initial APR makes
this loan inaccurate
Feedback: A variance of more than 1/8th of 1% on a regular loan from the previously disclosed APR requires
re-disclosure.
Question 2:
Question:
Creditors have certain requirements under Regulation Z relating to the right to rescind. Which statement is
incorrect relating to the creditors' responsibilities?
Answer (Correct): The creditor must begin the process of ensuring all security interests are terminated
including the security interest of subcontractors or suppliers within 30 days of the consumer exercising her
right to rescind.
Feedback: Termination of all security interest must take place within 20 days of the consumer exercising her
right to rescind.
Question 3:
Question:
A closed-end transaction under Regulation Z requires all the following disclosures EXCEPT:
Answer (Correct): A home equity plan disclosure
Feedback: A home equity plan disclosure is associated with an open-end transaction like a revolving account.
Question 4:
Question:
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310012 1/3
6/16/23, 2:26 PM Courses
Which of the following is NOT a reason for TILA?
Answer (Correct): Governs charges for business entities
Feedback: TILA covers financing for consumers not businesses.
Question 5:
Question:
Home Equity plans under Regulation Z include the following:
Answer (Correct): A loan for a child’s college tuition
Feedback: All other options are business related activities. A child's college tuition is would fall under credit
that is used primarily for personal, family or household purposes.
Question 6:
Question:
A Residential Mortgage Transaction defined under Regulation Z:
Answer (Correct): Includes a security interest in any consumer dwelling
Feedback: TILA considers a residential mortgage transaction as a security in any consumer dwelling; not a
commercial dwelling.
Question 7:
Question:
In a transaction subject to rescission, the creditor must deliver two copies of the right to rescind to each
consumer entitled to rescind or one copy if the notice is delivered electronically. The following statement is
correct relating to the notice and the right to rescind:
Answer (Correct): When a consumer rescinds a transaction the security interest giving rise to the right of
rescission becomes void and the consumer shall not be liable for any amount including any finance charges
Feedback: When a consumer rescinds, effectively the consumer is saying the transaction never happened.
The consumer can't have any costs associated with something that never happened.
Question 8:
Question:
Regulation Z implements the Federal Truth-in-Lending Act (TILA) under the authority of which federal
agency?
Answer (Correct): The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
Feedback: CFPB under the Dodd Frank Act is the enforcement agency over TILA or Reg Z.
Question 9:
Question:
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310012 2/3
6/16/23, 2:26 PM Courses
An applicant is required to pay an underwriting fee because he is financing; however, he pays cash for the
fee. Is his underwriting fee included in the finance charge?
Answer (Correct): Yes, because the applicant is financing
Feedback: The reason the borrower has an underwriting fee is because he is financing. The fact that he pays
cash for the fee is not important. The fee is included in the finance charge because he is financing. Remember,
the finance charge is the dollar amount the credit will cost.
Question 10:
Question:
Generally, in a refinance transaction on a primary residence, in which a security interest will be acquired or
retained in any consumer dwelling, all of the following are correct EXCEPT:
Answer (Correct): When more than one consumer has the right to rescind in a transaction all consumers are
required to exercise their right to rescind for the rescission to be effective
Feedback: It takes only one consumer to rescind the transaction even if multiple consumers have that right.
https://ameritrain.tiltlms.com/lesson/play/progress/1310012 3/3
