Magazine Introduction
The National Association of REALTORS has published homebuyer and seller generational
trends r elating to home sellers and their selling experience. This information should prove
helpful to the buyer when negotiating for a home purchase.
1
Edition v.122221 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Trends
Statistical item to be addressed Details of the statistic
for review on this topic from the survey
Typical home seller 54 years old
Median household income $104,100
Sellers 36-50 years old Median age 42
Sellers 36-50 years old Highest median income $121,300
Sellers 61-69 years old Median age 65
Sellers over 70 years old Lowest income $69,000
Married couples Seventy percent of sellers
Married couples 36-50 years old Eighty five percent of sellers
Married couples 51-60 years old Seventy one percent
Sellers who moved within the state Seventy percent
Sellers under 35 years old Seventy nine percent moved within the
state
Sellers 61-69 years old Fifty seven percent moved within the state
Selling because home is to small (total) 16 percent
Job relocation (total) 14 percent
Desire to move closer to friends and family (total) 13 percent
Sellers 35 years old or under believe home is too small 31 percent
Sellers 70 years old and over want to be closer to family 33 percent
Sellers lived in home on average 9 years
Sellers 35 years old and under stayed in their home 5 years
Administration and Verification
2
The Contract
A
rmed with the pre-approval letter the buyer begins the house hunting process. The preapproval
letter, although not a loan commitment by the lender, does provide the real estate agent and
the seller security that the buyer has the potential to make a purchase based on an analysis by
the lender that will provide the financing. The real estate process includes the selection of a real estate agent.
Some real estate agents represent the buyer while others represent the seller. Selecting a real estate agent is
an important decision and requires more than a personal relationship. Purchasing a home is based on a
business relationship that involves disclosures from the real estate agent along with a commitment from the
buyer and seller to consent to the conditions of the contract.
A buyer’s agent is responsible for providing the buyer with market information, finding the property that meets
the buyers’ needs, including their purchasing capacity. In addition, the agent will offer property option
selections. There are real estate listings that are available to assist the real estate agent and buyer in finding
available properties for sale. Once a property is selected, the real estate agent will make an offer on behalf of
the buyer to the seller. After an offer is made, the seller will either accept, reject or make a counteroffer. The
hope is that the buyer will find a property that meets the parameters of the qualifying approval level and
satisfies the buyer’s expectations.
Assuming the seller accepts the buyer’s offer, the parties execute a contract between them. In general, the
contract is referred to as a purchase and sale agreement (P&S). States have different statutes that regulate the
disclosures and required practices relating to real estate contracts. The purchase and sale agreement typically
include the following items: the sales price, earnest money, and contingencies.
The sales price
As stated the sales price is the purchase price to be paid for the property and agreed to by both parties. The
purchase price is not necessarily the final price because there could be changes to the agreed to price. Some of
the causes for adjusting the purchase price are:
▪ Appraisal valuation that may not support the sales price
▪ Property inspection which could result in a possible price reduction
Earnest Money
Earnest money is a good faith deposit that the buyer makes to induce the seller to execute a sales contract and
cease offering the property for sale. It is customary for the buyer to deposit a personal or cashier’s check within
one to three days of mutual acceptance. The check will be held by the selling agent’s broker until the
completion of the deal. Earnest money funds must meet two critical requirements - they must originate from
the borrower’s own funds, and the processor must confirm the borrower can receive credit for these assets.
The Universal Residential Loan Application (URLA) will reflect these funds as a cash deposit, and the amount is
included in available assets. When the loan closes the earnest money is credited and will reduce the amount of
cash the borrower is required to bring to closing. If, however, the borrower fails to meet the terms of the P&S
agreement, then any collected earnest money deposit could be forfeited and retained by the seller.
3
Contingencies
Contingencies:
All P&S agreements will include contingencies. These are conditions that must be met to complete the home
purchase. If one of these contingencies are not met, the sale may be canceled by the buyer or seller. The
following are some common contingencies: inspection, financing, title, appraisal and addendums.
Inspection Contingency
This contingency allows the buyer to conduct a home inspection before going ahead with the purchase. If the
inspection uncovers a problem with the home, the buyer can renegotiate with the seller, who may repair or
offer a credit for the problem. If the problem is severe, the buyer can back out of the purchase without losing
their earnest money deposit.
Financing Contingency
This contingency requires the buyer to receive mortgage approval before making the purchase. If the buyer
is unable to obtain approval after a good-faith effort, then he may be released from the contract without loss
of any earnest money or assume any liability.
Title Contingency
This contingency gives the buyer the right to review the home’s title for problems or conflicting claims of
ownership. If the title review turns up a serious problem with the title, the buyer does not have to move
forward with the transaction.
Appraisal Contingency
This contingency allows the buyer to withdraw from the deal if the home’s appraisal reveals that the property
is not worth as much as the buyer intended to borrow and pay for it.
Addendums
An addendum, also known as a rider, is any additional request from the buyer to the seller that is not included
in the actual P&S document. Examples may include a buyer’s request that the seller pay part of the
buyer’s closing costs, or that the seller include appliances or furniture not originally included in the home’s sale
price.
A P&S agreement is considered fully executed when all parties to the transaction have signed the agreement.
4
