RHS Mortgage Loans (USDA)
RHS and USDA, a brief history…
The Rural Housing Service (RHS) offers
mortgage programs that can help low- to
moderate-income rural residents purchase,
construct, and repair homes.
The RHS, unlike FHA and VA, lends directly
to qualified borrowers and guarantees loans
that meet RHS program requirements made
by approved lenders.
The loan guarantee program guarantees the
lender 90% of the outstanding debt in the
event of a borrower’s default.
The RHS is part of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA). It addresses the
requirements of section 502 of the Housing
Act of 1949. The RHS loan program
expenditure of funds is contingent upon
funds being available for funding.
The program utilizes an automated
underwriting system known as GUS
(Guaranteed Underwriting System) to
underwrite loans based on historical data
and statistical information based on
borrower profiles.
Edition v.122319 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved P a g e 1 | 2
RHS Loans Features/Benefits
Features Benefits
Borrowers with or without
Down payment: none required
savings may apply
Allows more buyers to
100% financing
become homeowners
No seasoned funds or assets
No reserves
required
Qualifying ratios: Borrowers with satisfactory
Housing expense ratio = 29% (front end ratio) credit histories may exceed
DTI = 41% (back end ratio) ratios
Seller contributions: no limits Helps borrowers reduce cost
Borrowers can use
No minimum FICO score nontraditional or traditional
credit history
Upfront Guarantee fee = 1% loan amount.
Annual Guarantee fee = .35% loan amount of Non-refundable
unpaid principal balance (life of loan).
Income limits: based on 115% of US median Supports borrowers with
income limited income
Borrowers can purchase the
Purchase price limit: no maximum
home they can qualify for
Homebuyers: first time and repeat All homebuyers are eligible
For more detailed information:
Save this to your Favorites for future use: Loan Origination Handbook
Edition v.122319 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved P a g e 2 | 2
