This brochure is a summary review of the following
subjects:
• Real estate appraisals
• Advertising requirements and prohibited practices
• Fraud, FinCen, SARs, BSA/AML, SAFE/UST
• ARMS
Chapter Introduction
Now that you have completed your study of the various elements of the
mortgage process, we can now address specific areas of review. This
assessment should assist you with transferring newly acquired
information to long term memory, the basis for developing the ability to
apply the knowledge to answer complex and scenario based
questions. In this module we will review the basic elements of federal
laws and critical numbers that are important in the residential mortgage
industry.
1
Important Notes:
• MLO is not allowed to communicate with the Appraiser for any reason.
• Anyone receiving any incentive as a result of the loan closing is not allowed to select the appraiser.
• The borrower is not allowed to pay the appraiser at the door.
Terms
1. Subject property – Property being purchased, refinanced, or seeking secondary financing.
2. Comps – Properties that have sold recently, close to subject property and similar in size and
features. Generally, 3-6 comps required on a loan transaction.
3. Gross adjustment – limited to 25%. (The value of a comp. cannot be adjusted more than 25%.) This
guarantees that comps will be similar to subject property. Net adjustment limited to 15%.
4. Geographic and Market analysis – Addresses the economic setting of the property and the market
forces that might impact the value.
5. Functional Obsolescence – Internal and external factors that could impair the ability to sell the
property. (ex. 5 bedroom house with 1 bath)
6. VA appraisal – Certificate of reasonable value (CRV).
7. HVCC – Home Valuation Code of Conduct – Result of Fannie Mae settlement with New York City
Attorney General to improve appraisal independence and integrity rules. Replaced by the provisions of
Dodd Frank Act.
Types of Appraisals
1. Sales comparison or Market value approach – Uses comps. to determine value of subject property.
Generally used in an established environment where sales have taken place.
2. Cost approach – Determining the cost to rebuild. Generally used in an insurance claim.
3. Income approach – Used with a loan relating to an investment property. Appraiser determines the fair
market rental value of the subject property.
2
Appraisal Forms (Fannie Mae forms)
• Form 1004 – Uniform residential appraisal report (URAR) for an interior and exterior inspection of a
single unit property.
• Form 2055 – External only appraisal (called a drive by).
• Form 1073 – Interior and exterior inspection of a single unit property in a condominium.
Appraisal Update
• An appraisal more than 4 months (120 days) old will require an updated appraisal.
ECOA Appraisal rules
1. Copy of appraisal must be provided to client promptly, but no later than 3 days before closing. Client
gets copy even if they failed to pay for the appraisal.
2. If the loan does not close the client still gets copy within 30 days.
3. Lender is not allowed to charge borrower for a copy of the appraisal.
Dodd Frank Rules
1. Client gets copy of appraisal 3 days before closing.
2. Borrower cannot pay appraiser at the door.
3. Prohibits a person involved in loan production from selecting the appraiser.
Fannie Mae Appraiser requirements
1. Must be state-licensed or state-certified.
2. Must have a resume of knowledge and experience.
3. Generally, a copy of the errors and omissions insurance policy.
3
Terms
1. Contract – Legal agreement between 2 or more parties.
2. Mediator- Can make recommendations only.
3. Arbitrator – Serves as a unbiased entity that generates a binding decision.
4. Assignee – A person to whom rights are being transferred.
5. Assignor – Person who transfers.
6. Attorney-in-fact – Written power of attorney to act on behalf of the principal.
7. Seller contributions- Closing costs and pre-paids only. Not towards down payment.
8. Prepaid items – Items paid in advance – Escrows for taxes and insurance and daily interest paid in advance at
loan closing.
9. Maximum seller contributions: (CONVENTIONAL)
(a) Loan to > 90% LTV = 3% lesser of sales price or appraised value
(b) Investment property = maximum of 2%
(c) Maximum seller contributions may not exceed closing costs and pre-paids
Refinances
A refinance is replacing an existing loan with another loan. It is not a modification, which is making changes to
the existing loan.
Kinds of refinances
1. Rate and term, also called no cash-out. It reduces the rate and/or term of the loan.
2. Limited cash-out – allows $2000 cash back or 2%, whichever is lower.
3. Cash-out – Removing cash from the equity, includes a debt consolidation loan.
Subordination
If a borrower has a first and second mortgage and wants to replace the first, the second lien holder will need
to remain in second position to allow a new first mortgage to replace the original first.
Federal laws regulating advertising in the residential mortgage industry include 4 primary laws:
• The Truth-in-Lending Act (TILA)
• The Mortgage Assistance Relief Service (MARS)
• The Mortgage Acts and Practices Act (MAP)
• The Telemarketing Sales Rule (TSR)
4
Summary of mortgage advertising and commercial communication laws, regulations,
disclosures, and prohibited practices.
Law Category (R) Regulations/ (D) Disclosures/ (P) Prohibited Practices
TILA General R The Truth-in-Lending Act addresses certain requirements relating to
advertising mortgage products and services including disclosure requirements
and prohibited practices.
R If an advertisement for credit states specific terms it must only state those
terms available by the creditor.
R Required disclosures must be clear and conspicuous and in close proximity to
the advertised item.
R Disclosures by print, radio, television, and internet must not include
unreadable fine print, fast speech, low volume and graphics, or pictures
that obscure the disclosure content.
TILA Open-End R Triggering Terms (these advertised terms require additional disclosures)
when advertising for HELOCs:
• Finance Charge
• Other charges
• Taxes
• Payment terms
D Any loan fee.
D Dollar amounts and fees.
D Maximum APR.
R Advertising discounted and premium rates.
D Period of time the advertised rate will be available.
D Current APR for a fully indexed rate.
D Fully indexed rate.
R Advertising minimum periodic payments.
D Statement that a balloon payment may result when making minimum periodic
payments.
D A balloon payment will result, and the amount of the balloon payment, when
the minimum periodic payments are made for the maximum period.
TILA Open end R Advertising tax deductible interest.
and closed D Loan interest that exceeds the value of the home is not tax deductible.
end D A tax advisor should be consulted regarding questions relating to the
deduction.
R Misleading terms.
P Reference to “free money” relating to a HELOC.
P Advertising any reference to APR being fixed without specifying the fixed
period.
5
Law Category (R) Regulations/ (D) Disclosures/ (P) Prohibited Practices
TILA Closed- R Triggering Terms when advertising for closed-end loans:
End Loans • Amount or percent of any down payment
• Number of payments or the period of repayment
• Payment amounts
• Finance Charge
D The amount or percentage of the down payment.
D The terms of repayment over the full term of the loan.
D The APR and if the rate can increase after consummation.
R Disclosure of interest rates and payments if more than one APR will apply over
the life of the loan.
D Each simple interest rate that will apply.
D Period of time each simple interest rate will apply.
D The APR for the loan.
D ARMs will show the current rate based on the index and margin.
R Prohibited practices relating to closed-end mortgages.
P Misleading advertising of fixed rates and payments.
P Misleading comparisons in advertising.
P Misrepresenting advertising about government endorsements.
P Misleading use of current lender’s name.
P Misleading claims of debt elimination.
P Misleading use of the word “counselor.”
P Misleading foreign language advertising.
MARS R The Mortgage Assistance Relief Service regulations relating to advertising
include prohibited actions and special disclosures to ensure that consumers
are not misled relating to the availability of services and their rights under the
law.
P Prohibited misrepresentations:
• About the likelihood of obtaining a particular result as a result of the loan
modification
• About the time the process will take
• About the amount of money or debt relief relating to the modification
• The terms or conditions regarding any refunds from the MARS provider
P It is prohibited for a MARS provider to collect an advance fee prior to the
lender or servicer issuing a written loan modification agreement.
P Prohibited misleading actions:
• Implying that the MARS provider is affiliated with any governmental or non-
profit entity or the lender that is servicing the loan
• Suggesting the consumer will receive legal representation
• Suggesting to the consumer that they are not required to make a scheduled
payment
• Declaring that agreed to services have been completed and payment is due
R MARS regulations address both general and specific commercial
communication before a consumer agrees to engage the services of a MARS
provider. The following disclosures are required in both general and specific
commercial communication:
6
MARS D “(NAME of Company) including the fact that there is no association with the
(cont.) government and the service is not approved by the government or your
lender.”
D “Even if you accept this offer and use our service your lender may not agree to
change your loan.”
D Statements that may suggest that a consumer should stop making mortgage
payments for any period must include, “If you stop making your payments you
could lose your home or damage your credit.”
R Specific commercial communication occurs before a consumer agrees to
engage the services of the MARS provider.
D “You may stop doing business with us at any time.”
D “You may accept or reject the offer of loan modification from your
lender/servicer.”
D “If you reject the offer you do not have to pay us for our services.”
D “If you accept the offer you will have to pay us (include amount) for our
services.”
D “(NAME of Company) including the fact that there is no association with the
government and the service is not approved by the government or your
Lender.”
D “Even if you accept this offer and use our service your lender may not agree to
change your loan.”
D Disclosures in print must include the statement next to the disclosure in 2 pt
font larger than the disclosure. “(IMPORTANT NOTICE)”
D Verbal communication must include this statement, “before using this service
consider the following information.”
Law Category (R) Regulations/ (D) Disclosures/ (P) Prohibited Practices
MAP R Mortgage Acts and Practices regulates non-depository institutions. The act
addresses deceptive and abusive practices in advertising mortgage products
and prohibits misrepresentation expressly or implied in commercial
communication of mortgage terms.
P Misrepresentation of the interest charged
a. The interest charged for the mortgage credit product.
P b. The annual percentage rate, simple annual rate, periodic rate, or any
other rate.
c. The existence, nature, or amount of fees or cost to the consumer associated
with the mortgage credit product, including misrepresentation that no fees
are charged.
d. The existence, cost, payment terms, or other terms associated with any
additional products or features that may be sold with the product.
e. The terms, amounts, payments, or other requirements to taxes
associated with the mortgage credit product.
f. Any prepayment penalty associated with the mortgage credit product.
g. The variability of interest, payments, or other terms of the mortgage product
including the misuse of the term “fixed.”
h. Any comparison between any rate that is available for less than the full term
of the loan and any hypothetical interest rate.
7
MAP i. The type of mortgage product and misrepresentations relating to full
(cont.) amortization.
j. The amount of the obligation and misrepresentation relating to how much
cash or credit will be available.
k. The existence of the amount and timing of payments, including that
no payments are required in a reverse mortgage.
l. The potential for default including misrepresentation concerning the
circumstances the consumer could default for non-payment of
taxes, insurance, or maintenance.
m. The effectiveness of how the mortgage credit product could help the
consumer with difficulties in paying debts.
n. The association of the mortgage credit product or the provider of such
product especially with a governmental entity, including through the use
of formats, symbols, and logs that may resemble such entity.
o. Source of any commercial communication especially as it relates to the
consumers current lender.
p. The right of a consumer to reside in the dwelling including the time
a consumer with a reverse mortgage may reside in the house.
q. The fact that the consumer has been preapproved for a mortgage product.
r. The consumers ability or likelihood to obtain a modification or that the
consumer has been preapproved.
s. The availability, nature, or substance of counseling services.
P It is a violation to attain, or attempt to attain, any waiver of the consumer’s
right to any right under the act.
R Records must be maintained for 24 months.
Law Category (R) Regulations/ (D) Disclosures/ (P) Prohibited Practices
TSR R Addresses consumer fraud and abuse relating to telemarketing activities.
P Before a consumer consents to pay for goods and services offered, failing to
disclose truthfully, in clear and conspicuous manner all material restrictions,
limitations, or other information.
P Misrepresent the total costs to purchase, receive, or use.
P Making a false or misleading statement to induce any person to pay for goods
or services or induce a charitable contribution.
8
There are two categories of fraud that impact the mortgage industry.
1. Fraud for housing or fraud for property
• Involves material misrepresentation or omission of information with the intent to deceive or mislead a
lender to extend credit that would likely not be offered if the facts were known
• Generally committed by homebuyers attempting to purchase homes for their personal use
2. Fraud for profit
• Motivation is generally money and is normally committed by the mortgage industry personnel
• Generally characterized by fraud schemes
Fraud scheme defined:
• Air Loan – Straw buyer and straw seller making a complete transaction fraudulent and fictitious
• Churning – Excessive selling/lending activity for the purpose of generating fees
• Chunking – Multiple loan applications submitted to various lenders without disclosing the intent to purchase
other properties
• A person used to buy property in order to conceal the actual owner
Penalty for mortgage fraud
• $1,000,000 fine and/or 30 years in prison
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network or FinCen
• Tracks level of fraud activity
• Requires companies to report suspicious activity reports (SAR)
• Under the Department of the Treasury
Bank Secrecy Act , BSA, and Anti-Money Laundering BSA/AML
• The act requires financial institutions to records of cash purchasers of negotiable instruments, file reports of
cash transactions exceeding $10,000 (daily aggregate amount), and report suspicious activity that might
signify money laundering or tax evasion.
• Each loan or finance company must develop and implement a written anti-money laundering program to help
prevent the loan company from being used to facilitate money laundering or financing terrorist activities.
9
The Financial Services Modernization Act
Provides rules and regulations associated with the dissemination and protection of non-public
consumer information.
• The GLB Act requires companies give consumers privacy notices that explain the institutions
information sharing practices.
• Consumers have the right to opt out or say no to having their information shared with certain third
parties.
• If a consumer does not opt out, their non-public information may not be shared with
telemarketing, direct-mail marketing, or marketing through email companies.
• It prohibits pre-texting. (Getting a consumer’s information under false pretenses).
The Safeguard Rule
• As part of its implementation of the GLBA, the FTC issued the Safeguard rule which requires financial
institutions to have measures to keep customer information safe.
• The Safeguard rule requires companies to develop a written information security plan that describes
their program to protect customer information.
10
• The Uniform State Test (UST) is a test that replaces the state test for states that participate in the UST program.
• The UST tests applicants on the SAFE Act and the Model State Law (MSL) that assists states in implementing
the SAFE Act on a state level.
• 120 exam questions.
• 115 scored questions
Definitions
• Housing and Economic Recovery Act (HERA) – Passed by congress to address the declining housing market in
2008.
• Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act (SAFE Act)
(a) Title V of HERA
(b) Originally enforced by HUD
(c) Currently enforced by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) as regulation H
(d) Requires that there be a registry to track mortgage loan originators (MLOs)
(e) Requires states to ensure that MLOs be registered and/or licensed
(f) The MSL assists states in implementing the SAFE Act on a state level
Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) and The American Association of Residential Mortgage
Regulators (AARMR) created the MSL and also created and currently maintains the NMLS&R.
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry (NMLS&R):
(a) Registry for MLOs
(b) Provides unique identifier numbers for every registered MLO
(c) Requires all licensing processing to be done through the NMLS
11
Licensed MLOs must meet the following requirements:
Pre-license education 20 hours:
Core requirement: 8 hours
(a) 3 hours of federal law
(b) 3 hours of ethics which includes fraud, fair lending, and consumer protection
(c) 2 hours in non-traditional lending
Elective requirement:
(a) 12 hours of general mortgage education
Renewal (annual continuing education) 8 hours
Core requirements: 7 hours
(a) 3 hours federal law
(b) 2 hours ethics
(c) 2 hours non-traditional lending
(d) 1 hour elective requirement
(e) Must complete the education within the year in which the credit is given
(f) Must not take the same course for credit in subsequent years
Confidentiality
(a) NMLS may share non-public information with state regulatory authorities
(b) May share employment information and administrative actions with the public
Reciprocity
The agreement between states which states that if a person completes NMLS approved education in one
state the other states will give credit towards that state’s education requirement.
12
Purpose of the SAFE Act:
• Protect consumers
• Reduces fraud
Loan Processor, who is not required to be registered and/or licensed if the following applies:
• Only clerical and support duties
• Must be an employee
• Must be paid on a W2 basis
• Does not take loan applications
• Does not negotiate rates and terms of the loan
• Must be supervised by a registered and/or state licensed MLO
Independent Contract Processor/Underwriter
• Must maintain a unique identifier number
• Licensed as a mortgage loan originator
Non-traditional mortgage product
• Any product other than a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage
Exempt from licensing:
• An MLO employed by a depository institution
• An MLO employed by a legitimate non-profit
(a) Non-profit must have an IRS designation 501(C)(3)
(b) Engaged in affordable housing or housing education
• A real estate broker not engaged in financing or receiving compensation from the lending side
• An attorney who negotiates on behalf of a client but does not receive compensation from the lending side,
only from the client
• An individual negotiating terms on behalf of an immediate relative
• An individual negotiating terms of a loan for a previous residence
• A loan processor employed and not involved in origination functions
13
Mortgage Loan Originator:
• Takes loan applications
• Negotiates rate and terms
• Has never had a MLO originators license revoked
• Has not been convicted of a non-financial felony within past 7 years
• Has never been convicted of a felony involving fraud or money laundering
• A conviction is determined by the laws of the jurisdiction where the crime took place
• A pardoned or expunged conviction has no impact on a license
• If previously licensed and leaves the industry for 5 years, the MLO will need to retest
• If previously licensed and leaves the industry and returns, the MLO will need to complete the continuing
education for the year that he left the industry
• May only be employed by one entity at a time
• Must be sponsored to be active
• May only originate in states where the sponsor is licensed
Surety bonds, net worth, state recovery fund (consumer protections)
• Surety bond provided by the lender covers the MLO and protects the consumer. If the consumer gets a
recovery against the bond a new bond will be required.
• Net Worth is required in some cases.
• State recovery fund is where MLOs contribute to a fund designed to protect consumers if a claim is made.
Penalties and Prohibited Acts
• Civil penalty that can be imposed by the commissioner of $34,401 (2023) for each violation
• Not allowed to be paid for best efforts, may only be paid when the loan closes
• Can’t influence an appraiser to provide a particular value
• Can’t require a person to carry insurance that exceeds the value of the replacement value of the
property
14
Adjustable Rate Mortgage (ARM)
An ARM is a mortgage loan where the interest rate can adjust up or down during the period of the loan.
EX. 5/1 ARM 30 year loan (also called hybrid because it has a fixed term period)
5= The period the start rate is fixed. In this example 5 years.
1= Annual adjustment period, which means the rate can change annually after the fixed period. Adjustment
periods may also be in months.
Rate = Index + Margin.
Rate = the combination of the index and the margin = fully indexed rate.
Index = Market factor that changes based on changes in the financial market. Plural is indices; not indexes.
The index is not under the control of the lender.
Margin = The lender’s profit. Once established, it does not change for the life of the loan.
Note: Since the margin never changes the only way the rate changes is a change in the index.
CAPS = Limit the % of rate change for each adjustment period. Three categories of CAPS are:
1. Initial CAP = First time the rate can change. Based on start rate.
2. Periodic CAP = Kicks in after the initial CAP. Based on the previous period rate. EX. If previous period rate is 5%
and periodic CAP is 2%, the max change is 2% up or down. In this case a low of 3% or a high of 7%.
3. Life CAP = The maximum the rate can change over the life of the loan. Based on the start rate. EX. If the start
rate is 3% and the life CAP is 6% the maximum the rate can reach over the life of the loan is 9%.
Examples of indices:
• COFI = Cost of Funds Index
• LIBOR = London Interbank Offer Rate
• Prime (Generally used in Home Equity Lines of Credit – HELOC)
• T-Bill – Treasury Bill
Which component of an ARM changes = Index
Which component of an ARM remains the same = Margin
15
Example:
A 5/1 ARM had a index of 3% when the loan was locked and the lender adds a margin of 2%. The CAPS are
2/2/6. The index in year 6, is 5.5% and in year 7, 4.75%. What is the rate on the second adjustment period?
Rate = Index + Margin
YR 1-YR 5 5% = 3% + 2%
YR 6 ? = 5.5% + 2% = 7.5% Rate (NO) Since the CAP is 2% the rate may not change up or down
by more than 2% . The CAP limits the percentage of change to 2% which means the maximum the rate can go
to in:
YR 6 is 7 %.
YR 7 ? = 4.75% + 2% = 6.75% (YES) Since the CAP limits the percentage of change, the initial
CAP has already been used so the periodic CAP kicks in and will be used for the balance of the loan. The
periodic CAP is based on the previous year rate. If the previous year was 7%, the CAP would have allowed the
rate for YR 7 to increase by 2% or decrease by 2%. Which means the rate could have gone to 9% or as low as
5%. Since the actual change in the rate is based on the index which is 4.75%, when added to the margin it
becomes 6.75% which means it did not reach the CAP rate so the correct rate for:
YR 7 is 6.75%
Rounding Mortgage rates
Rates are rounded to the nearest 1/8th of 1%, or .125.
5.06% = 5% rounded down. 5.07 rounded up to 5.125 (midpoint of.125=.0625)
Mortgage rate choices less than a whole number percent:
1/8th =.125, 1/4th =.250, 3/8th =.375,1/2 =.5, 5/8 =.625, 3/4= .750, 7/8 = .875,
16
