Upon completion of the chapter, you will be able to:
• Understand a summary of RESPA-TILA-TRID
• Understand a summary of ECOA
• Review ATR/QM
• Review HOEPA/HPML
Chapter Introduction
Now that you have completed your study of the various elements of the
mortgage process, we can now address specific areas of review. This
assessment should assist you with transferring newly acquired
information to long term memory, the basis for developing the ability to
apply the knowledge to answer complex and scenario based
questions. In this module we will review the basic elements of federal
laws and critical numbers that are important in the residential mortgage
industry.
1
Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA)
• Regulation X.
• Administered by CFPB (Originally administered by HUD).
• Covers one-to-four family residential property.
• TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure Rule (TRID) amended RESPA Sections 4 and 5 disclosure requirements.
• RESPA Disclosure Requirements:
o limited to reverse mortgage loans.
o loans made by a creditor who makes five or fewer loans in a year.
• All other RESPA disclosure requirements apply to loans covered under RESPA and TRID.
Purpose
• To help consumers become better shoppers for settlement services.
• To eliminate kickbacks and referral fees (RESPA Section 8).
RESPA Required Disclosures
When borrowers apply for a mortgage loan, mortgage brokers and/or lenders must give the borrowers:
• RESPA Section 4: HUD-1 Settlement Statement: Required at closing or settlement. Amended under TRID.
• RESPA SECTION 5: Special Information Booklet, Required for purchase transactions only, three days
after receiving the loan application. Amended under TRID.
• RESPA SECTION 5: Good Faith Estimate (GFE) of settlement costs required three days afterreceiving
the loan application. Amended under TRID.
• RESPA Section 6: Mortgage Servicing Disclosure Statement
o Discloses to the borrower whether the lender intends to service the loan or transfer it to another
lender and is required within three business days of receiving a loan application for a mortgage
servicing loan
o It must indicate whether the servicing of the loan may be assigned, sold, or transferred to any other
person at any time while the loan is outstanding.
Each transferor servicer and transferee servicer of any mortgage servicing loan shall deliver to the
borrower a written Notice of Transfer, of any assignment, sale, or transfer of the servicing of the loan.
2
Transfer of existing servicing
• The transferor must deliver notice to the borrower no less than 15 days before the effective date of the
transfer of the servicing of the mortgage servicing loan.
• The transferee must deliver the notice to the borrower no more than 15 days after the effective date of the
transfer.
Consumer protection during transfer of servicing
• If during the 60-day period, beginning on the effective date of transfer, a servicer receives payment on
or before the applicable due date:
o a late fee may not be imposed on the borrower with respect to that payment
o the payment may not be treated as late for any other purposes
Duty of loan servicer to respond to borrower inquiries
• 5 business days – a servicer must acknowledge a written request from a borrower
• 30 business days – a servicer must take action on a qualified written request from a borrower
A servicer must notify a borrower of any delinquency by the 36th day of the delinquency on the loan payment.
Affiliated Business Arrangement (ABA) Disclosure
Required whenever a settlement service provider involved in a RESPA covered transaction refers the
consumer to a provider with whom the referring party:
▪ Has a greater than 1% ownership or other beneficial interest.
▪ The parties have an Associate relationship, meaning the transaction would not qualify as “arms-length.”
▪ Disclosure required at or before the time of the referral.
RESPA Section 8 Violations – Prohibition Against Kickbacks & Unearned Fees
• Any referral of a settlement service is not a compensable service.
• A business entity, whether or not in an affiliate relationship, may not pay any other business entity or the
employees of any other business entity for the referral of settlement service business.
• For a federally-related mortgage loan, payments may only be received for services actually performed.
• The term payment is synonymous with the giving or receiving any "thing of value,'' and does not require transfer
of money.
RESPA permits:
• An employer's payment to his or her own employees for any referral activities.
▪ Examples of service providers (federally related mortgage loans):
o Attorney, Real Estate Agent, MLO, Appraiser, Surveyor, Title Insurance Agent, etc.
3
Record Keeping, Violations, Enforcement
Record keeping
Any documents provided pursuant to this section shall be retained for five (5) years from the date of
execution.
Violations of Section 8
Violations of Section 8 anti-kickback provisions fines can be up to $10,000 and/or imprisonment up to one
year. For civil law suits, liability is limited up to three times of the charge paid for the service. Civil penalties
may include up to three times the amount of the service received.
RESPA Section 9: Seller Required Title Insurance
RESPA prohibits a seller from requiring the home buyer to use a particular title insurance company.
RESPA Section 10: Escrow Accounts
Initial Escrow Statement – itemizes the estimated taxes, insurance premiums, and other charges anticipated
to be paid from the Escrow Account during the first twelve months of the loan. Required at closing or within
45 days of closing.
Annual Escrow Statement – provides an estimate of the escrows once a year. Due within 30 days of end of
calendar year.
4
Truth-in-Lending Act (TILA)
• Regulation Z.
• Title 1 of the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
• Originally under the authority of the Federal Reserve Board.
• Now under Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).
• Promotes the informed use of consumer credit by requiring disclosures about its terms and cost.
• Amended under TRID.
• CFPB amended Regulation Z early and closing TILA disclosures by integrating them with RESPA Sections 4 and 5
disclosures effective October 3, 2015.
Coverage of Regulation Z
Regulation Z applies to each individual or business that offers or extends credit when key conditions are met:
• The credit is offered or extended to consumers.
• The credit is subject to a finance charge or is payable by a written agreement in more than four
installments.
• The credit is primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.
Definitions
Terms Definitions
Consumer A natural person to whom consumer credit is offered or extended.
Consummation The time that a consumer becomes contractually obligated on a credit
transaction. Generally when the promissory note is signed. May be a different
date from the settlement (RESPA) or closing date.
Creditor A person:
(A) Who regularly extends consumer credit that is subject to a finance charge
or is payable by written agreement in more than four installments, not
including a down payment.
(B) To whom the obligation is initially payable, either on the face of the note or
contract, or by agreement when there is no note or contract.
Does not include a person that does not extend credit more than 5
times within a year.
Finance Charge Finance charge is the cost of consumer credit as a dollar amount. It includes
any charge payable directly or indirectly by the consumer and
imposed directly or indirectly by the creditor as a condition of the
extension of credit.
Periodic rate A rate of finance charge that is or may be imposed by a creditor on a balance
for a day, week, month, or other subdivision of a year.
Person Means a natural person or an organization, including a corporation,
partnership, proprietorship, association, cooperative, estate, trust,
or
government unit.
5
Open End Credit
Same as Home Equity Line of Credit (HELOC).A revolving account secured by the equity in real property.
Early Disclosures (Due at time of application)
• Application Disclosure
• HELOC Brochure
Tax Deductibility
• A consumer must consult a tax advisor regarding the deductibility of interest and charges for the HELOC
Account.
• An MLO is acting outside the scope of his or her authority if tax advice or any other specialized advice outside of
mortgage loan origination is provided.
Closed –End Transactions
Disclosures
(a) Creditor - The identity of the creditor making the disclosures
(b) Amount Financed - the amount of credit provided to you or on your behalf.
(c) Finance Charge - the dollar amount the credit will cost you.
(d) Annual Percentage Rate - the cost of your credit as a yearly rate.
Pre-payment - Loan documents that disclose the prepayment penalty are the TIL disclosure, Good Faith
Estimate, HUD1, Loan Estimate, Closing Disclosure, and the note.
Balloon Payment - a payment that is more than two times a regular periodic payment.
Variable Rate (ARMs) – If an ARM transaction, the consumer must be provided with:
• the booklet titled Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate Mortgages (CHARM).
• a loan program disclosure for each variable-rate program in which the consumer expresses an interest.
Determination of Annual Percentage Rate
(1) The annual percentage rate is a measure of the cost of credit, expressed as a yearly rate.
(2) The annual percentage rate shall be considered accurate if it is not more than 1/8 of 1 percentage point
above or below the annual percentage rate determined for regular transactions as disclosed in the early
disclosures.
(3) In an irregular transaction, the annual percentage rate shall be considered accurate if it is not more than
1/4 of1 percentage point above or below the annual percentage rate determined in the early disclosures.
6
Right of Rescission
Consumer’s right to rescind
1. A credit transaction (refinance or secondary financing) involving a consumer's principal dwelling only.
2. Each consumer who has ownership interest has the right to rescind the transaction.
3. May exercise the right to rescind until midnight of the third business day (mailbox rule) following:
o consummation.
o delivery of the notice.
o delivery of all material disclosures, whichever occurs last.
Notification of Rescission
The consumer shall notify the creditor of the rescission by:
o mail
o other means of written communication
Notice is considered given when:
o mailed
o filed for electronic transmission
o sent by other means
4. When more than one consumer in a transaction has the right to rescind, the exercise of the
right by one consumer shall be effective as to all consumers.
5. A creditor shall deliver two copies of the notice of the right to rescind to each consumer entitled to
rescind (one copy to each if the notice is delivered in electronic form).
6. Within 20 calendar days after receipt of a notice of rescission, the creditor shall return any money or
property that has been given to anyone in connection with the transaction and shall take any action
necessary to reflect the termination of the security interest.
7. If the required notice or material disclosures are not delivered, the right to rescind shall expire three
years after consummation.
Record Retention
A creditor must retain evidence of compliance with this regulation, other than advertising requirements, for 2 years
after the date disclosures are required to be made or action is required to be taken.
Penalties
In the case of an individual action relating to a closed-end transaction secured by real property or a dwelling: either
minimum $400, and maximum $4,000, or, in the case of a class action, such amount as the court may allow, no
minimum per each member of the class, and the total recovery in any class action, or series of class actions, arising out
of the same failure to comply by the same creditor may not be more than the lesser of $1,000,000 or 1% of the net
worth of the creditor.
7
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA)
• Regulation B
• Administered by CFPB
• Covers both individuals and businesses
Purpose
• The purpose of this part is to promote the availability of credit to all creditworthy applicants without regard to
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, or age (provided the applicant has the capacity to
contract).
• Requires creditors to notify applicants of action taken on their application.
• Requires creditors to report credit history in the names of both spouses on an account.
• Prohibits creditor practices that discriminate on the basis of any of the prohibited factors.
• Requires creditors to provide applicants with copies of appraisal reports used in connection with credit
transactions.
General Rules
• Discrimination.
A creditor shall not discriminate against an applicant on a prohibited basis regarding any aspect of a credit
transaction.
• Discouragement.
A creditor shall not make any oral or written statement, in advertising or otherwise, to applicants or prospective
applicants that would discourage on a prohibited basis a reasonable person from
making or pursuing an application.
• Marital status
ECOA only considers married, unmarried, and separated as a marital status. Divorced, single, and widowed
are not ECOA categories.
• Disparate treatment
Occurs when a creditor treats an applicant differently based on a prohibited basis.
8
General Rules concerning use of information
A creditor shall not take a prohibited basis into account in any system of evaluating the creditworthiness of
applicants.
• The age of an elderly applicant may be considered when such age is used to favor the elderly applicant in
extending credit.
• Childbearing, childrearing may not be considered in evaluating creditworthiness or the potential for diminished
income in the future.
• A creditor shall not take into account whether there is a telephone listing in the name of an applicant for
consumer credit but may take into account whether there is a telephone in the applicant's residence.
• Immigration status. A creditor may consider the applicant's immigration status, or status as a permanent
resident of the United States, and any additional information that may be necessary to ascertain the
creditor's rights and remedies regarding repayment.
• A creditor shall evaluate married and unmarried applicants by the same standards.
• In evaluating joint applicants, a creditor shall not treat applicants differently based on the existence, absence, or
likelihood of a marital relationship between the parties.
ECOA Required Disclosures
Notification of action taken, ECOA notice, and statement of specific reason.
• Requires the creditor to notify applicant within 30 days after receiving a completed application.
• Requires the creditor to notify the applicant 30 days after taking adverse action.
• 90 days after notifying the applicant of a counteroffer if the applicant does not expressly accept or use the credit
offered.
Content of notification when adverse action is taken.
• Notification must be in writing.
• Must contain a statement of the action taken.
• The name and address of the creditor.
• The name and address of the Federal agency that administers compliance with respect to the creditor.
• A statement of specific reasons for the action taken.
• A disclosure of the applicant's right to a statement of specific reasons within 30 days, if the statement is
requested within 60 days of the creditor's notification. The disclosure shall include the name, address, and
telephone number of the person or office from which the statement of reasons can be obtained. If the creditor
chooses to provide the reasons orally, the creditor shall also disclose the applicant's right to have them
confirmed in writing within 30 days of receiving the applicant's written request for confirmation. (30 60 30 rule)
9
Appraisal notifications
• Provide a notice of the right to receive a copy of the appraisal within 3 business days of receiving an application
for credit.
• Provide a copy of the appraisal no later than 3 days prior to consummation.
• Provide a copy of the appraisal no later than 30 days after determining the loan will not close.
Record Keeping, Violations, Enforcement
Record keeping
Documents must be retained for 25 months.
Violations of ECOA
• Civil liability for actual damages.
• Civil liability for punitive damages.
Punitive damages are limited to non-government entities and are capped as follows:
▪ The lesser of $500,000 or 1% of a creditor’s net worth in a class action lawsuit.
▪ $10,000 on an individual claim.
10
TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure Overview
RESPA & TILA TRID
(October 3, 2015)
Initial Loan Estimate
{5 Loans or Fewer) ( 6 Loans or More)
• 3 Business Days after
Application
• 7 Business Days before
Good Faith Estimate Closing
• 10 Business Days terms
(RESPA} Loan Estimate (LE)
available
{Combines GFE and Early TIL Revised LE
Disclosure)
• 3 Business Days after
Early TIL Disclosure knowing the change
• 4 Business days before
{TILA}
closing
Form H-24 • 7 Business days before
closing (if altered)
• Never after CD
Special Information Repla ed by Tool Kit • Not on Same Day as CD
Booklet (TRIO)
(RESPA) {3 Business Days after
AlmlicotionJ
HUD 1 & HUD lA
• 3 Business Days
Closing Disdosure (CD)
before Closing
(RESPA}
(Combines HUD 1 and Final
Tll Disclosure)
Final TIL Disclosure
Form H-25
(TILA)
11
Disclosure RESPA TILA TRID ECOA Transaction Timing Citation
Application X X 6 Items of Info (TRID) Considered CFR 1024
A-Address received when all CFR 1026
L-Loan Amount items have been
I-Income received
E-Estimated Value
N-Name
S-Social Security
Number
Good Faith X Closed-end loan 3 business days CFR 1024
Estimate when creditor makes after receiving
(GFE) 5 or fewer loans application
annually and reverse
RESPA mortgages
Section 5
Early TILA X Closed-end loan 3 business days CFR 1026
Disclosure after receiving
(TIL) application
Special X Closed-end loan 3 business days CFR 1024
Information purchase after receiving
Booklet transactions when application
creditor makes 5 or
RESPA fewer loans annually
Section 5
(Explains GFE
& HUD 1)
Servicing X X All federally related 3 business days CFR 1024
Disclosure mortgage loans after receiving
loan application
RESPA
Section 6
Homeowners X X X All federally related 3 business days CFR 1024
hip mortgage loans after receiving CFR 1026
counseling application
list
Right to X X Closed-end loans 3 business days CFR Part 1002
Receive Copy after receiving
of Appraisal application
Disclosure
12
Disclosure RESPA TILA TRID ECOA Transaction Timing Citation
Loan X • Closed-end loans • 3 business days (any CFR 1026
Estimate (LE) attached to real day open for
initial estate (6 or more business) after
loans annually) receiving TRID
• Construction loans version of loan
3-page
• Raw land application
document
• Land more than 25 • 7 business days
acres before
Combines
consummation
the RESPA
(mailbox rule)
GFE and the
• Terms available
early TILA minimum 10
disclosure business days
(except interest
rate)
• No fees, except
credit report, can be
collected before LE
provided
Tool Kit X Closed-end loans 3 business days after
(Explains LE purchased attached receiving the
& CD) to real estate (> 5 application
loans annually)
Replaces the
RESPA
Special
Information
booklet
CHARM X X Adjustable Rate 3 business days CFR 1026
Booklet Mortgages (ARMs) after application
received
Consumer
Handbook on
Adjustable
Rate
Mortgages
Specific X X Adjustable Rate 3 business days CFR 1026
Program Mortgages (ARMs) after application
Disclosure received
13
Disclosure RESPA TILA TRID ECOA Transaction Timing Citation
Loan X • Closed-end loans • Change CFR 1026
Estimate (LE) attached to real circumstance
Revised estate (6 or more • 3 business days
loans annually) after knowing
• Construction loans about the change
• Raw land • 4 days before
• Land more than 25 consummation
acres • 7 business days
before
consummation, if
mailed
• Never on same
day as CD
• Never after CD
provided
HUD1 & X Closed-end loan At closing or CFR 1024
HUD1 A when creditor makes settlement
5 or fewer loans
RESPA annually and reverse
Section 4 mortgage
Final TILA X Closed-end loans At closing or CFR 1026
Disclosure settlement
(TIL)
Closing X • Closed-end loans • 3 business days CFR 1026
Disclosure attached to real (mailbox rule)
(CD) estate (> 5 loans before
annually) consummation
• Construction loans • Additional 3 days
5-page
• Raw land if:
document
• Land more than 25 1. APR changes by
acres > 1/8th
Combines
• Timeshares 2. loan program
the RESPA
changes
HUD1 and
3. a prepayment
the final TILA
penalty added
disclosure • Disclosed next day
after revised LE
provided
• One day before
consummation if
borrower requests
• Can change up to
time of
consummation
• Can change after
consummation
14
Disclosure RESPA TILA TRID ECOA Transaction Timing Citation
Affiliated X All federally related • No later than CFR 1024
Arrangement mortgage loans when a referral is
Disclosure made to a
company where
greater than 1%
ownership exists
• An Associate
relationship
transaction
Initial Escrow X All federally related Generally, at CFR 1024
Disclosure mortgage loans closing
where escrows exist
Annual X All federally related Annually CFR 1024
Escrow mortgage loans
Disclosure where escrows exist
Copy of X All mortgage loans • 3 business days CFR Part 1002
Appraisal (cannot charge for before closing
copy of appraisal) • Within 30 days if
loan does not
close
15
1
Edition v.122220 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Fair Lending Laws
Fair Lending Laws -The three primary fair lending laws that regulate the residential mortgage industry are:
1. The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) – addresses fairness in the application process, the extension of
credit, and appraisal disclosure requirements.
2. The Fair Housing Act (FH Act) – addresses fairness in the extension of credit relating to housing and other
housing related discrimination practices.
3. The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) – addresses patterns of discrimination
EQUAL CREDIT OPPORTUNITY ACT (REGULATION B) CFR 1002.
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (Title VII of the Consumer Credit Protection Act)
Purpose
▪ Promote the availability of credit to all creditworthy applicants.
▪ Prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, receipt of
public assistance, or good faith exercise of any rights under the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
▪ The Act also requires creditors to provide applicants, upon request, with the reasons underlying decisions to deny
credit.
▪ A requirement that creditors provide to applicants a copy of all appraisals and other written valuations used in
connection with the applicant’s application for first lien loans secured by a dwelling.
The regulation also requires creditors:
▪ to notify applicants of action taken on their applications
▪ to report credit history in the names of both spouses on an account
▪ to retain records of credit applications
▪ to collect information about the applicant's race and other personal characteristics in applications for certain
dwelling-related loans for monitoring and federal law purposes
▪ to provide applicants with copies of appraisal reports used in connection with credit transactions
A completed application - An application which a creditor has received all the information that the creditor regularly
obtains and considers in evaluating applications for the amount and type of credit requested including, but not limited to:
▪ credit reports
▪ any additional information requested from the applicant
▪ any approvals or reports by governmental agencies or other persons that are necessary to guarantee, insure, or
provide security for the credit or collateral
Credit transaction - Every aspect of an applicant's dealings with a creditor regarding an application for credit or an
existing extension of credit including, but not limited to:
▪ information requirements
▪ investigation procedures
▪ standards of creditworthiness
▪ terms of credit
▪ furnishing of credit information, revocation, alteration, or termination of credit, and collection procedures
Elderly - means age 62 or older.
Marital status
▪ The state of being unmarried, married, or separated, as defined by applicable state law.
▪ The term “unmarried” includes persons who are single, divorced, or widowed.
2
ECOA
1002.4
General rules.
Discrimination.
▪ A creditor shall not discriminate against an applicant on a prohibited basis regarding any aspect of a credit
transaction.
Discouragement.
▪ A creditor shall not make any oral or written statement, in advertising or otherwise, to applicants or prospective
applicants that would discourage on a prohibited basis a reasonable person from making or pursuing an application.
Written applications.
▪ A creditor shall take written applications for the dwelling-related types of credit.
Form of disclosures
▪ A creditor that provides in writing any disclosures or information required must provide the disclosures in a clear
and conspicuous manner in a form the applicant may retain.
▪ The uniform residential Loan Application, Fannie Mae form 1003, and Freddie Mac form 65 are acceptable forms
to meet this requirement. The form 1003 is considered the industry standard.
1002.5
Rules concerning requests for information.
Requests for information.
A creditor may request any information in connection with a credit transaction as long as the creditor does not violate any
Federal or state law regarding privacy, privileged information, credit reporting limitations, or similar restrictions on
obtainable information.
Required collection of information.
▪ A creditor shall request information for monitoring purposes for credit secured by the applicant's dwelling.
▪ A creditor may obtain information required by a regulation, order, or agreement issued by, or entered into with, a
court or an enforcement agency, including the Attorney General of the United States or a similar state official, to
monitor or enforce compliance with this law Act or other Federal or state statutes or regulations.
Limitation on information about race, color, religion, national origin, or sex.
A creditor shall not inquire about the race, color, religion, national origin, or sex of an applicant or any other person in
connection with a credit transaction, except to monitor or enforce compliance with federal or state regulations.
Information about a spouse or former spouse
A creditor may request information concerning the spouse or former spouse of an applicant under the following:
▪ The spouse will be permitted to use the account.
▪ The spouse will be contractually liable on the account.
▪ The applicant is relying on the spouse's income as a basis for repayment of the credit requested.
▪ The applicant resides in a community property state or is relying on property located in such a state as a basis for
repayment of the credit requested.
▪ The applicant is relying on alimony, child support, or separate maintenance payments from a spouse or former
spouse as a basis for repayment of the credit requested.
3
ECOA
Disclosure about income from alimony, child support, or separate maintenance.
A creditor shall not inquire whether income stated in an application is derived from
▪ Alimony
▪ Child support
▪ Separate maintenance payments
Unless the creditor discloses to the applicant that such income need not be revealed if the applicant does not want the
creditor to consider it in determining the applicant's creditworthiness.
Childbearing, childrearing. A creditor shall not inquire about:
▪ birth control practices
▪ intentions concerning the bearing or rearing of children
▪ capability to bear children
A creditor may inquire about the following, provided such information is requested without regard to sex, marital status,
or any other prohibited basis:
▪ the number and ages of an applicant's dependents
▪ about dependent-related financial obligations or expenditures
Permanent residency and immigration status.
▪ A creditor may inquire about the permanent residency and immigration status of an applicant or any other person
in connection with a credit transaction.
Income.
A creditor shall not discount or exclude from consideration the income of an applicant or the spouse of an applicant because
of a prohibited basis
▪ because the income is derived from part-time employment.
▪ is an annuity, pension, or other retirement benefit.
▪ a creditor may consider the amount and probable continuance of any income in evaluating an applicant's
creditworthiness.
When an applicant relies on alimony, child support, or separate maintenance payments in applying for credit, the creditor
shall consider such payments as income to the extent that they are likely to be consistently made.
Credit history.
To the extent that a creditor considers credit history in evaluating the creditworthiness of similarly qualified applicants for
a similar type and amount of credit, in evaluating an applicant's creditworthiness, a creditor shall consider:
▪ The credit history, when available, of accounts designated as accounts that the applicant and the applicant's spouse
are permitted to use, or for which both are contractually liable.
▪ On the applicant's request, any information the applicant may present that tends to indicate the credit history
being considered by the creditor does not accurately reflect the applicant's creditworthiness.
▪ On the applicant's request, the credit history, when available, of any account reported in the name of the
applicant's spouse or former spouse, that the applicant can demonstrate, accurately reflects the applicant's
creditworthiness.
Insurance.
A creditor shall not refuse to extend credit and shall not terminate an account because of the applicant’s age for the
following reasons:
▪ credit life ▪ accident
▪ health ▪ disability
4
1002.9
Notifications.
Notification of action taken, ECOA notice, and statement of specific
reasons. When notification is required.
A creditor shall notify an applicant of action taken within:
• 30 days after receiving a completed application concerning the creditor's approval of, counteroffer to,
or adverse action on the application.
• 30 days after taking adverse action on an incomplete application or a notice that the applicant can request
within.
• 60 days the specific reasons for the denial.
• 30 days after taking adverse action on an existing account.
• 90 days after notifying the applicant of a counteroffer if the applicant does not expressly accept or use
the credit offered.
(2) Content of notification when adverse action is taken.
Shall be in writing and shall contain:
▪ A statement of the action taken.
▪ The name and address of the creditor.
▪ The name and address of the Federal agency that administers compliance with respect to the creditor.
▪ If the creditor chooses to provide the reasons orally, the creditor shall also disclose the applicant's right to have
them confirmed in writing within 30 days of receiving the applicant's written request for confirmation.
1002.12
Record retention.
Retention of prohibited information. A creditor may retain in its files information that is prohibited for use in evaluating
applications, without violating the Act, if the information was obtained:
▪ from consumer reporting agencies
▪ from an applicant
▪ or from others without the specific request of the creditor
▪ or to monitor compliance with the Act and or other Federal or state statutes or regulations
Preservation of records
Applications.
For 25 months after the date that a creditor notifies a consumer applicant of action taken on an application.
5
1002.13
Information for monitoring purposes.
Information to be requested.
A creditor that receives an application for credit primarily for the:
▪ purchase or refinancing of a dwelling occupied, or to be occupied by, the applicant as a principal residence
▪ where the extension of credit will be secured by the dwelling, shall request as part of the application the
following information regarding the applicant(s):
Ethnicity:
using the categories:
▪ Hispanic or Latino
▪ not Hispanic or Latino
Race:
using the categories:
▪ American Indian or Alaska
Native
▪ Asian
▪ Black or African American
▪ Native Hawaiian or other
Pacific Islander
▪ White
Sex:
Marital status, using the categories
▪ Married
▪ Unmarried
▪ separated
Age.
Redlining
Making a geographical decision not to lend in a particular area. A violation of ECOA occurs because the credit may become
unavailable to all credit worthy applicants that may reside in that area
Reverse redlining
Is a violation of ECOA because a geographic area is targeted because it may have a high percentage of credit challenged
consumers and the creditor targets the area for purposes of predatory and abusive lending practices.
6
Fair Housing Act
FAIR HOUSING ACT (as amended) (Title VIII of the 1968 Civil Rights Act) Sec. 800. [42 U.S.C. 3601 note] Short Title
This title may be cited as the "Fair Housing Act". Sec. 801. [42 U.S.C. 3601]
Another of the Fair Lending laws that impact residential lending and the behavior of mortgage professionals is
the Fair Housing Act, which is also known as Title VIII of the Civil Rights act of 1968. The Department of Housing
and Development (HUD) is responsible for the enforcement of the act. Since HUD is also responsible for the
Federal Housing Administration (FHA), the Fair Housing Act is referred to as the FH Act to avoid confusion.
Congress passed this act to address the problem of unlawful discrimination in housing based on a number of
prohibited factors.
Some important definitions used relating the FH Act are:
Blockbusting
The practice of realtors using scare methods to get homeowners to sell their properties at a deflated price by
telling them that members of a particular class, for example, race, nationality or color, are moving into their
neighborhood and that they should sell before their home values drop. Although lending professionals are
typically not directly involved in this scheme it is important for mortgage loan originators to understand the
practice and avoid being a beneficiary of the illegal activity.
Familiar Status
A protected class added to the FH Act in 1988. This protection against housing discrimination applies to any
person who is pregnant or in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who is under the age of 18,
including the person under the age of 18. Discrimination of this nature applies to refusing housing opportunities
because of the existence, or likely existence, of children occupying the premises.
Handicap
Another protected class added to the FH Act in 1988. A person with a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits the capacity of that individual to navigate one or more major life activities. Handicap does
not include a person addicted to a controlled substance such as a heroin addict.
Redlining
The discriminatory practice of lenders deciding not to make loans in certain geographic areas because the lender
has concluded that these areas are high-risk areas. The offensive aspect of this practice relates to the fact that
frequently the redlined areas involve portions of the city inhabited by minority group members. The illegal aspect
of this practice is that credit-worthy residents within the area are denied access to loans for housing because of
redlining.
Reverse Redlining
The illegal practice of targeting residents within a particular geographic location for predatory lending practices
because they are potentially high-risk borrowers.
Steering
A potential customer is either encouraged or discouraged from purchasing housing in a particular area or
community because of the agent's actions or lender’s actions. This is a violation of the FH Act because the
customer has the right to full access and this right should not be interfered with based on a prohibited basis.
7
Discrimination in Residential Real Estate-Related Transaction Sec. 805. [42 U.S.C. 3605]
In general it is unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real
estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the
terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of:
▪ Race
▪ Color
▪ Religion
▪ Sex
▪ Handicap
▪ Familial status
▪ National origin
Residential real estate-related transaction:
▪ The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance relating to a dwelling for:
o Purchasing
o Constructing
o Improving
o Repairing
o Maintaining
▪ Loan secured by residential real estate.
▪ The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
The prohibited factors relating to protected classes under the Fair Housing Act have some common elements to
the Equal Credit opportunity Act however there are some differences:
Common to both acts:
▪ Race
▪ Color
▪ National Origin
▪ Sex
▪ Religion
Unique to FH Act:
▪ Handicap
▪ Familiar status
Unique to ECOA
▪ Age
▪ Marital status
▪ Income from public assistance
▪ Exercising rights under the Consumer Credit Protection Act
8
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
Regulation C 12 U.S. Code Chapter 29
The last of the three fair lending laws is the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act HMDA. HMDA’s purposes are to
provide the public and public officials with sufficient information to enable them to:
▪ determine whether institutions are serving the housing needs of the communities and neighborhoods in
which they are located
▪ to assist public officials in distributing public sector investments in a manner designed to improve the
private investment environment
▪ to assist in identifying possible discriminatory lending patterns and enforcing antidiscrimination statutes
Unlike the other fair lending laws we have reviewed, HMDA, from a discrimination basis, is looking for patterns
of discrimination, not just discrimination against an individual person.
Financial institutions collect various types of information from consumers in the course of processing loan
applications. To promote HMDA’s goals, HMDA and Regulation C require financial institutions to compile and
report to regulators some of this information and other information obtained or generated concerning the
application or loan.
Regulation C requires institutions to report lending data to their supervisory agencies on a loan-by-loan and
application-by-application basis by way of a “register” reporting format.
9
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
Applicability
The regulation covers two categories of financial institutions.
1. Depository institutions
The first category is a “depository institution,” which the regulation defines as a bank, savings association, or a
credit union that meets the following criteria:
▪ On the preceding December 31, had a home or branch office in an MSA; in the preceding calendar year,
originated at least one first lien home purchase loan, or a refinancing of such loan, on a one-to-four- family
dwelling.
▪ The institution is federally insured or regulated.
▪ The mortgage loan referred to is federally guaranteed or insured.
▪ The institution intended to sell the loan to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac.
▪ Originated at least:
▪ on the preceding December 31, originated at least 200 open-end lines of credit in each of the two
preceding calendar years.
OR
▪ 0n the preceding December 31, originated at least 25 closed-end loans in each of the two preceding
calendar years.
2. Non-depository mortgage lending institutions
A non-depository mortgage lending institution is covered if:
▪ on the preceding December 31, had a home or branch office in an MSA
AND
▪ receive applications for, originate, or purchase five or more home purchase loans, home improvement loans,
or refinancing loans on property located in an MSA in the preceding calendar year
AND
either:
o on the preceding December 31, originated at least 200 open-end lines of credit in each of the two
preceding calendar years.
OR
o 0n the preceding December 31, originated at least 25 closed-end loans in each of the two preceding
calendar years.
10
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
Loan Information
For each application or loan, institutions are required to:
▪ identify the purpose (home purchase, home improvement, or refinancing), lien status, and whether the
property relating to the loan or loan application is to be owner-occupied as a principal dwelling.
Applicant Information
▪ Institutions must report data regarding the ethnicity, race, sex, and annual income of applicants for
applications and originated loans. Reporting this data is optional for purchased loans.
▪ Information regarding the ethnicity, race, and the sex of the borrower or applicant must be requested by
the lender, including applications made entirely by telephone, mail, or Internet.
▪ If the information is not provided by the applicant, and if the application is submitted in person, the
lender is required to note the information on the basis of visual observation or surname.
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act allows lenders to collect the data for monitoring purposes
under HMDA.
Pricing-Related Data
Institutions must report the rate spread between the annual percentage rate (APR) and the average prime offer
rate (APOR) for a comparable transaction as of the date the interest rate is set or locked.
▪ The annual percentage rate is the annualized percentage of the dollar amount the loan will cost over the
life of the loan.
▪ The average prime offer rate is the average APRs of prime or the best borrowers reported every week by
Freddie Mac.
Rate spread disclosure requirement.
Lien status Spread Reporting requirement
First > 1.5% Home purchase loans,
dwelling secured home improvement loans,
refinancings.
Second > 3.5% Home purchase loans,
dwelling secured home improvement loans,
refinancings.
Excluded from the rate spread calculation:
▪ Incomplete applications
▪ Withdrawn applications
▪ Denied, or approved but not accepted applications
▪ Purchased loans
▪ Home-improvement loans not secured by any dwelling
▪ Assumptions
▪ Home equity lines of credit
▪ Loans not subject to Regulation Z
11
Lenders must also report whether the loan is subject to the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA).
▪ A loan becomes subject to HOEPA when the APR, or the points and fees on the loan, exceed the HOEPA
triggers for High Cost Loans. We will discuss HOEPA loans later in this course.
Reporting Format
Financial institutions are required to record data regarding each application for, and each origination and
purchase of:
▪ home purchase loans
▪ home improvement loans
▪ refinancings
▪ to be recorded on a Loan/Application Register, also known as the HMDA-LAR
The HMDA-LAR
▪ Must be submitted to the Federal Reserve and reference the financial institution’s regulatory agency by
March 1 following the calendar year covered by the data.
▪ An institution must make its loan application register available to the public after deleting fields which
specifically identify loan data.
▪ The modified HMDA-LAR for a given year must be publicly available for the previous calendar year by
March 31 of the following year for requests received on, or before, March 1, and within 30 days for
requests received after March 1.
▪ A financial institution must retain its full, unmodified, HMDA-LAR for at least three years for examination
purposes.
▪ Institutions may impose reasonable fees for costs incurred in providing or producing the data for public
release.
12
16
QUALIFYING INCOME QUESTIONS
(All Loan Transactions)
Question Rationale
1. What is your hourly, Verifiable and consistent income is necessary for mortgage approval.
monthly, or annual Accurately calculating income is extremely important during the pre-
income? Are you paid qualification stage. If the MLO does not correctly calculate income, a
weekly, bi-monthly, borrower may not qualify for an affordable mortgage or may not obtain loan
bi-weekly, or monthly? approval by an underwriter.
2. Do you receive Additional income may be instrumental when qualifying a borrower. The
additional monthly income type and its ability to be documented are relevant to the
income? Can this qualification process. Without proper documentation, a borrower may not
income be use these funds.
documented for the
last 12 months?
3. Are more than 25% of Borrowers who are commission W2 earners must provide the last two years
your earnings from of filed tax returns to average their earnings. The tax returns should include
commissions and/or all schedules, but specifically the 2106 Employee Expense Form. For
incentives? example, outside sales people, truck drivers, auto sales personnel, and
mortgage loan originators.
4. Do you receive bonus Only bonus income a borrower receives over two years can be used for
income? qualification purposes. This income will be averaged over two years.
5. Do you receive Temporary or part-time employees can use their income to purchase a
income from a part- home by averaging those dollars over the past two years. Generally,
time or temporary individuals who have been temporarily employed for less than 18 months
employment? cannot use their income to qualify. If temporary employment is long-term
with a single employer, underwriters view that differently than working with
multiple contract assignments with a variety of employers. A person working
in a part-time capacity must show a pattern of maintaining part-time
employment over the most recent two years.
6. Do you receive any These items must meet a 3 years continuance test to be included in
additional income qualifying income.
that you would like to
disclose? (Alimony,
social security,
disability, child
support, etc.)
7. Do you have any Lenders view borrowers more favorably when they have a financial
funds saved for down investment in the property than those who choose not to put any money
payment and/or down. A down payment reduces the risk a lender assumes by extending
closing costs? financing for a mortgage. A savings pattern indicates an applicant's ability to
Example: 401K, manage their finances in a positive manner by limiting expenses and
savings account, investing in their future.
stocks, etc.
17
CALCULATING INCOME
Type Definition/Calculation Information Needed
Hourly (Hourly rate * 40)*52/12=Gross Monthly Income 30 days of paystubs
Weekly (Weekly pay * 52)/12 = Gross Monthly Income 4 paystubs totaling 30 days
Bi-weekly (Bi-weekly pay * 26)/12 = Gross Monthly Income 2 paystubs totaling 30 days
Semi-monthly (Semi-monthly pay * 24)/12 = Gross Monthly 2 paystubs totaling 30 days
Income
Monthly Monthly 1 paystub
Temporary/Part- Average over 2 years Two years of W2s and written
time verification
Self Employment Average of the most recent 2 years of filed tax Two years of the most recent
income returns. filed tax returns
Depreciation expense can be added back to the
income to qualify the self employed borrower.
TIP: Earnings used for qualifying purposes must be gross monthly income.
18
• The Dodd Frank Act mandated the requirements for the Ability to Repay (ATR)/ Qualified Mortgages (QM) rule.
• MLOs under the ATR rule must make a good faith determination that a borrower has the ability to repaythe
loan before it closes.
• There are eight factors that must be considered under the ATR rule:
1. Expected income and assets (excludes value of the property securing the loan)
2. Employment status
3. Mortgage payments considering:
(a) The fully indexed rate or introductory rate, whichever is higher
(b) Fully amortized payments
4. Simultaneous loans on same dwelling
5. Monthly payments for taxes, insurance, and homeowners assoc. fees
6. Current debt obligations including alimony and child support including:
(a) Installment debt
(b) Revolving debt
(c) Existing mortgages not being paid off
7. Debt-to-Income ratio and residual income
8. Credit history
What can we use as a determination that the ATR was:
Reasonable and in good faith
(a) Underwriting standards resulted in low rates of default
(b) Payment history
Not reasonable and in good faith
(a) Underwriting standards that were not effective in determining ATR were ignored
(b) The consumer defaulted shortly after closing, or after an ARM reset
Penalty
If a consumer can prove in court that the loan did not meet ATR requirements the consumer is entitled to:
• 3 years finance charges plus attorney fees
• Maximum period to file a claim is 3 years
19
Qualified Mortgages
• Qualified mortgages are mortgages that do not contain risky features
• The QM rule provides a presumption the ATR requirements have been met
Types of Qualified Mortgages
General
Seasoned
Small Creditor
Balloon
• General and Seasoned QMs can be originated by all lenders
• Small creditor and balloon can be originated by small creditors operating primarily in rural areas
All QMs have the following features and limitations:
• No negative amortization
• No interest only
• Maximum loan term 30 years
• Points and fees limited to 3% for loans greater than or equal to $124,331
General QM underwriting limitations:
• Must qualify borrower using the maximum rate within first five years
• Limits based on loan’s pricing
o The annual percentage rate (APR) exceeds the average prime offer rate (APOR) for a comparable transaction by less
than 2.25 percentage points as of the date the interest rate is set.
▪ Loans must meet a full amortization schedule
Seasoned QM - To become eligible to become a seasoned QM and receive a safe harbor from ATR liability at the end of the 36-
month seasoning period, the loan must meet the following criteria:
First lien; max. 30-yr term; fixed rate; fully amortizing; no balloon payments; max. 3% points and fees; max. two 30-day and no
60-day delinquencies at end of seasoning period; and borrower must quality based on 8 QM factors (income, assets, debt, etc.)
20
If a consumer closes on a loan that is a QM and is not a Higher Priced Mortgage loan the
consumer is in the Safe Harbor region. Which means that the presumption that the QM meets
ATR requirements cannot be challenged.
Non-Safe Harbor Loans
QM loans that are HPML loans are open for dispute. The consumer is able to challenge in court
(rebut the presumption) that the QM meets the ATR requirements.
Higher Priced Mortgage Loans (HPML)
• Exceeds the Average Prime offer rate by 1.5% APR or more for a 1st lien loan
• Exceeds the Average Prime offer rate by 3.5% APR or more for a 2nd lien loan
Average Prime Offer Rate (APOR) is the average of all APR rates in the US for the previous
week, published the next week. Determination if the loan is a HPML loan is determined when
the rate is locked.
21
The Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) Section 1026.32
• Amends the Truth-in-Lending Act (TILA) “Section 32,” to require special requirements for loans
that exceed the HOEPA threshold.
• Mortgages that exceed the HOEPA thresholds are referred to as “high-cost mortgages.”
• HOEPA includes:
o Purchase-money mortgages
o Refinances
o Closed-end home equity loans
o Open-end (HELOCS)
HOEPA Excludes:
• Reverse mortgages
• Construction loans
HOEPA has three tests to determine if a mortgage exceeds the HOEPA thresholds:
• The APR test
• The Points and fees test
• The Pre-payment Penalty test
The APR Coverage Test. A loan is a high cost mortgage if the APR when the rate is locked is > the APOR* by:
a. 6.5% on a first lien
b. 8.5% on a first lien less than $50,000
c. 8.5 % on a junior lien transaction
*APOR – The Federal Reserve averages the APRs of prime borrowers at the end of a given week and publishes
that average APR rate as the Average Prime Offer Rate (APOR) the following week. The APOR is used for both
HOEPA and HPML APR thresholds.
The Points and Fees Coverage Test. A loan is a high-cost mortgage if the points and fees are > the following
thresholds:
a. 5% of the loan amount for loans equal to or greater than $24,866
b. 8% of the total loan amount or $1,243 for loan amounts less than $24,866
Pre-payment Penalty Test. A transaction is a high-cost mortgage if you charge a prepayment penalty:
a. > 36 months after closing
b. In an amount > 2% of the amount prepaid
NOTE: Definition of the following symbols:
≥ means greater than and equals to; > means greater than
22
Homeownership counseling
• Prior to making a “high cost mortgage,” the consumer must produce written evidence that they have
received home ownership counseling.
• The homeownership counselor cannot be affiliated with, or employed by, a MLO’s organization.
• MLO’s cannot steer the consumer to a particular counseling agency.
• The consumer must have received the LE before the counseling session.
• A list of homeownership counselors is required to be provided to all federally related loan applications
within 3 days of receiving the application.
o List must come from the CFPB website or through HUD
o Minimum of ten counseling agencies in local area
o List cannot be more than 30 days old
• MLO’s may pay the counseling fee for the consumer, but may not condition payment on the consumer
getting the high cost loan.
NOTE: All high cost loans REQUIRE homeownership counseling. All other federal related loans require
consumers receive a list of homeownership counseling agencies, but they are NOT REQUIRED to receive
counseling.
Prohibited Acts or Restrictions on High-cost Mortgages
• Cannot charge a fee to modify, renew, defer, extend, or amend a high-cost mortgage.
• Late fee is limited to 4% of the past due payment. Most fees for payoff statements are banned.
• Points and fees cannot be financed into the loan.
• No negative amortization. No rate increase after default.
• No paying a contractor directly from the proceeds of a high-cost loan
• Refinancing a high-cost mortgage into another high-cost mortgage within one year after having
extended credit.
• All loans must meet the ability-to-repay requirements under the Dodd Frank Act.
• Payment schedule that consolidates more than two periodic payments.
• Requires disclosure 3-days before closing that the consumer does not have to continue with loan.
23
HOEPA Example
Applicant applied for a $100,000 loan and the interest rate quoted was 4%. There was a prepayment penalty
and points and fees were charged on the loan. The following actions would trigger TILA section 32 or a High
Cost loan designation.
1. The APR is 10.625% (exceeds the rate by more than 6.5%)
2. The points and fees are $6,100 (exceeds the threshold of 5%)
3. The prepayment penalty is for 4 years and is quoted as 3% of the payoff amount. ( exceeds the 36 month maximum
prepayment period and exceeds the payoff penalty amount of 2%)
Higher Priced Mortgage Loan (HPML) (Section 1026.35)
• Known as Section 35 loans
A loan is a HPML if:
a. The APR ≥ APOR by 1.5% for a first lien
b. The APR ≥ APOR by 3.5% for a subordinate lien
c. The APR ≥ APOR by 2.5% for a jumbo loan
Requirements
a. Consumer’s ability to repay must be verified.
b. Escrows for taxes and insurance required for a minimum of 5 years for non-QM HPML mortgage
loans.
c. LTV must be 80% or less to cancel the escrow account.
d. Prepayment penalty not allowed:
o After the two-year period following consummation.
o If payments will change any time during the first 4 years after closing.
NOTE: All HOEPA loans that exceed the APR threshold are also HPML and must meet the additional
requirements of HPML loans.
MLO Compensation
• MLOs may be compensated for the amount of credit extended and not for any loan terms, for
example, interest rates, APR, origination fees, etc.
• MLO compensation may not vary based on terms of the loan.
• MLO compensation records must be maintained for three (3) years.
24
