1
n
o
i
t
c
e
S
1
Edition v.110817 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosures (TRID)
In this section we will:
• Discuss TILA-RESPA Rule rationale
• Explore implementation of TILA-RESPA Rule
• Review which transactions are covered under the rule
• Examine record retention requirements
• Analyze Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure requirements
History and Purpose
In July 2010, the Dodd-Frank Act was enacted to provide consumer protections against abusive practices in
financial services. Title XIV of the act specifically addresses residential mortgage lending. The Dodd-Frank Act
transferred rulemaking authority under both TILA and RESPA to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(Bureau), an agency created by Congress to confront issues relating to consumer protections. In addition,
Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A mandate that the Bureau establish a single disclosure for
use by lenders or creditors in complying with the disclosure requirements of both RESPA and TILA. These
disclosures are the early RESPA Good Faith Estimate and the TILA disclosures, the RESPA HUD1 Settlement
Statement and the final TILA disclosure. Also, the Special Information Booklet that explains the RESPA
settlement process for consumers was amended to meet the requirements of the new disclosures. Section
1098(2) of the Dodd-Frank Act amended RESPA section 4(a) to require that the Bureau publish a single,
integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions. Similarly, section 1100A(5) of the Dodd-Frank Act
amended TILA section 105(b) to require that the Bureau publish a single, integrated disclosure for mortgage
loan transactions. The Dodd-Frank Act required the Bureau to issue for public comment purposes, rules and
model disclosures that integrated the TILA and RESPA disclosures by July 21, 2012.
The Bureau issued proposed integrated disclosure forms and rules for public comment on July 9, 2012 (the
2012 TILA-RESPA Proposal). On December 31, 2013, more than 17 years after Congress first directed the
Federal Reserve Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to integrate the
disclosures under TILA and RESPA, the Bureau published the 2013 TILA-RESPA Final Rule. The rule was
enacted on October 3, 2015.
The Road to Implementation:
• The Bureau engaged in extensive consumer and industry research, analysis of public comments, and
public outreach for more than a year.
• After issuing the proposal, the Bureau conducted a large-scale quantitative study of its proposed
integrated disclosures with approximately 850 consumers.
• The study concluded that the Bureau’s integrated disclosures performed statistically and significantly
better on average than previous disclosures under TILA and RESPA.
2
The TRID final rule applies to:
▪ Most closed-end consumer mortgages
▪ Certain types of loans that are currently subject to TILA, but not RESPA. Rules subject to RESPA and not
TILA are now subject to the TILA-RESPA rule’s integrated disclosure requirements, including the
following loans for personal family and household reasons:
o Closed-end loans secured by real property
o Construction-only loans (not currently covered by RESPA)
o Loans secured by vacant land or by 25 or more acres (not currently covered by RESPA)
o Timeshare plans
TRID does not apply to:
(These loans will continue using current disclosures – GFE and HUD 1)
▪ Home Equity Lines of Credit (HELOCs)
▪ Reverse mortgages
▪ Mortgages secured by a mobile home or by a dwelling that is not attached to real property (i.e., land)
▪ Loans made by persons who are not considered “creditors” because they make five or fewer mortgages
in a year.
3
Requirements
Record Retention*
Depending on a party’s role as a creditor or servicer, the TILA-RESPA Rule mandates retention of specific
documents for a defined period. The table below provides an overview of these requirements:
Who What How Long
Creditors Closing Disclosure (and all Five (5) years after consummation
documents related to the Closing
Disclosure)
Creditors and Post-Consummation Escrow Two (2) years
Servicers Cancellation Notice (Escrow
Closing Notice) and the Post-
Consummation Partial
Payment Policy disclosure
Creditors and For all other evidence of Three (3) years after
Servicers compliance with the Integrated consummation
Disclosure provisions of
Regulation Z
(including the Loan Estimate)
Table 16: Record Retention Requirements
*NOTE: Creditors should be aware of various state laws that require record retention periods that may exceed
Federal record retention requirements.
4
Applications received on or after October 3, 2015, require that applicants receive the loan
estimate and the tool kit* within three business days.
Initial Loan Estimate:
•
Required three (3) business days after receiving the loan application. (The TILA and RESPA regular
business day rule applies. “Any day the creditor is open for business”)
•
The earliest the loan can close is seven (7) business days after the Loan Estimate is placed in the mail. A
different rule is applied when referring to closing or consummation. This is the mailbox rule which is all
calendar days except Sundays and legal public holidays
•
The consumer may modify or waive the seven-business-day waiting period after receiving the Loan
Estimate, if the consumer has a bona-fide personal financial emergency that necessitates
consummating the credit transaction before the end of the waiting period. To modify or waive the
waiting period, the consumer must give the creditor a dated written statement describing the
emergency, requesting the waiting period be waived and signed by all consumers liable on the
obligation. The creditor may not provide the consumer with a pre-printed waiver form.
•
A loan originator may not collect any fees other than the credit report fee until the applicant has
received the Loan Estimate and indicates an intent to proceed.
•
The terms of the Loan Estimate are available for a minimum of 10 business days. The interest rate is not
included in the available terms. The creditor determines how long a quoted interest rate is available.
5
Timing & Delivery
The Toolkit
Required within three (3) business days of receiving the Loan Application. Replaces the Special Information
Booklet under RESPA for TRID covered transactions.
Example: Timing and Delivery Table
Action Date
Application received Monday, October 5
Loan Estimate mailed Thursday, October 8
Date Loan Estimate received Tuesday, October 13
First Date loan can close Thursday, October 15
Table 17: Timing and Delivery Table
Figure 9: Three-Day Closing Disclosure Rule
6
Loan Estimate
12 CFR 1026.37 1026.19(e)
A MLO must provide a Loan Estimate to an applicant in accordance with these conditions:
▪ For closed-end credit transactions secured by real property (other than reverse mortgages), the creditor
is required to provide the consumer with the best estimate known at the time of credit costs and
transaction terms on a new form called the Loan Estimate.
▪ Integrates and replaces the existing RESPA GFE and the initial TIL
▪ Creditor to provide Loan Estimate within three-business days of a consumer’s loan application
▪ Must be in writing
▪ Creditor responsible for delivering or mailing the Loan Estimate by the 3rd business day of an application
▪ If an originator of a loan is a mortgage broker, either the creditor or the mortgage broker may provide
the Loan Estimate
▪ May issue revised Loan Estimates only when changed circumstances apply
▪ Revised Loan Estimate must be delivered within three business days of the creditor becoming aware of
the information resulting in the change
▪ For any loans subject to the TILA-RESPA rule that are also federally related mortgage loans subject to
RESPA, creditors must use the new integrated TILA-RESPA Form (form H-24)
▪ If the Loan Estimate is not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer is considered to have
received the Loan Estimate three (3) business days after it is delivered or placed in the mail. The only
exception is if the creditor has evidence the customer received it earlier.
Loan Estimate Key Provisions
Loan Estimate Trigger
A loan estimate is triggered once an application is established.
An application:
▪ means the submission of a consumer’s financial information for purposes of obtaining an extension of
credit.
▪ may be submitted in written or electronic format, and includes a written record of an oral application.
▪ consists of the submission of the following six pieces of information:
1. A address of the property
2. L loan amount
3. I income
4. E estimated value
5. N name(s) of applicant
6. S social security number to make a credit inquiry
Once the six pieces of information are received, the loan estimate must be delivered within 3 business days of
receiving the application.
7
Application Withdrawal/Denial
An application may be withdrawn or denied under the following conditions and the creditor does not have to
provide the Loan Estimate, if the:
▪ creditor determines within the three-business-day period that the consumer’s application will not or
cannot be approved on the terms requested by the consumer
▪ consumer withdraws the application within the three-business-day period, the creditor does not have
to provide the Loan Estimate.
Good Faith*
Creditors are responsible for ensuring that the figures stated in the Loan Estimate are made in good faith and
consistent with the best information reasonably available to the creditor at the time they are disclosed.
Whether or not a Loan Estimate was made in good faith is determined by calculating the difference between
the estimated charges originally provided in the Loan Estimate and the actual charges paid by or imposed on
the consumer in the Closing Disclosure.
Generally, if the charges paid by or imposed on the consumer exceeds the amount originally disclosed on the
Loan Estimate, it is not in good faith, regardless of whether the creditor later discovers a technical error,
miscalculation, or underestimation of a charge.
However, a Loan Estimate is considered to be in good faith if the creditor charges the consumer less than the
amount disclosed on the Loan Estimate, without regard to any tolerance limitations.
*NOTE: Under TRID, MLOs are expected to act in good faith and exercise due diligence. This can be
accomplished by using estimates and identifying costs accurately.
8
2
n
o
i
t
c
e
S
9
Edition v.042717 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Charging More than Disclosed Figures
A creditor may charge the consumer more than the amount disclosed in the Loan Estimate in specific
circumstances (TILA-RESPA rule (§ 12 CFR 1026.19(e)(3)(iii)):
Condition 1: Unlimited change
Charges in this category may change without regard to tolerance limitations are:
• Prepaid interest; property insurance premiums; amounts placed into an escrow, impound, reserve or a
similar account
• For services required by the creditor, if the creditor permits the consumer to shop and the consumer
selects a service provider other than the service provider recommended by the creditor
• Charges paid to third-party service providers for services not required by the creditor
Condition 2: 10% Tolerance
Charges for third-party services and recording fees paid by or imposed on the consumer are grouped together
and subject to a 10% cumulative tolerance. This means the creditor may charge the consumer more than the
amount disclosed on the Loan Estimate for any of these charges as long as the total sum of the charges added
together does not exceed the sum of all such charges disclosed on the Loan Estimate by more than 10%. (§ 12
CFR 1026.19(e)(3)(ii))
• Recording fees
• Charges for third-party services where:
o The charge is not paid to the creditor or the creditor’s affiliate
o The consumer is permitted by the creditor to shop for the third-party service, and the consumer
selects a third-party service provider on the creditor’s written list of service providers
NOTE: A creditor may charge more than 10% in excess of an individual estimated charge in this category, as
long as the sum of all charges is within the 10% cumulative tolerance.
Condition 3: Zero Tolerance Change
Fees in this category may not change once disclosed to a loan applicant.
Condition 3: Zero Tolerance
The amount charged falls within a zero-tolerance threshold category where variations are never permitted) (§
12 CFR 1026.19(e)(3)(ii))
In some cases, a creditor may charge a fee that was not initially charged. Depending of the fee, it may be
subject to “zero tolerance” meaning this amount cannot change once disclosed on the loan estimate. These
zero tolerance charges are:
• Fees paid to the creditor, mortgage broker, or an affiliate of either
• Fees paid to an unaffiliated third party if the creditor did not permit the consumer to shop for a
third-party service provider for a settlement service (§ 12 CFR 1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(C)); or
• Transfer taxes.
10
Loan Estimate Thresholds Exceeded
If the amounts paid by the consumer at closing exceed the amounts disclosed on the Loan Estimate beyond the
applicable tolerance threshold, the creditor must refund the excess to the consumer no later than 60 calendar
days after consummation.
Charges subject to zero tolerance, any amount charged beyond the amount disclosed on the Loan Estimate,
must be refunded to the consumer.
For charges subject to a 10% cumulative tolerance, to the extent the total sum of the charges added together
exceeds the sum of all such charges disclosed on the Loan Estimate by more than 10%, the difference must be
refunded to the consumer.
Changed Circumstance
A changed circumstance for purposes of a revised Loan Estimate is:
▪ An extraordinary event beyond the control of any interested party or other unexpected event specific
to the consumer or transaction
▪ Information specific to the consumer or transaction that the creditor relied upon when providing the
Loan Estimate and that was inaccurate or changed after the disclosures were provided
▪ New information specific to the consumer or transaction that the creditor did not rely on when
providing the Loan Estimate.
Changed Circumstances That Affect Settlement Charges
A creditor may provide and use a revised Loan Estimate redisclosing a settlement charge if changed
circumstances cause the estimated charge to increase, or in the case of charges subject to the 10% cumulative
tolerance, resulted in the sum of those charges to increase by more than the 10% tolerance.
Examples of changed circumstances affecting settlement costs include:
▪ A natural disaster, such as a hurricane or earthquake, damages the property or otherwise results in
additional closing costs;
▪ The creditor provided an estimate of title insurance on the Loan Estimate, but the title insurer goes out
of business during underwriting;
Examples of general changed circumstances:
▪ New information not relied upon when providing the Loan Estimate is discovered, such as a neighbor of
the seller filing a claim contesting the boundary of the property to be sold.
▪ There are two co-applicants applying for a mortgage loan and the creditor relied on a combined income
when providing the Loan Estimate, but one applicant subsequently becomes unemployed.
11
Revised Loan Estimate after a Rate Lock
A creditor may use a revised Loan Estimate if the rate is locked after the initial Loan Estimate is provided.
If the interest rate for the loan was not locked when the Loan Estimate was provided, and when the rate is
locked at a later date and points or lender credits for the mortgage loan change, the creditor is required to
provide a revised Loan Estimate, 3 business days after the interest rate is locked, so the borrower may use the
revised Loan Estimate to compare points and lender credits charged.
The revised Loan Estimate must reflect the revised interest rate as well as any revisions to the points disclosed
on the Loan Estimate pursuant to § 12 CFR 1026.37(f)(1), lender credits, and any other interest rate dependent
charges and terms that have changed due to the new interest rate.
Timing for Revisions to Loan Estimates
▪ Revised Loan Estimate must be delivered no later than three business days after receiving the
information sufficient to establish that one of the reasons for the revision has occurred.
▪ The Revised Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure may not be delivered on the same day.
▪ When a revised Loan Estimate is provided in person, it is considered received by the consumer on the
day provided.
▪ If mailed or delivered electronically, it is considered to have been received three business days later.
▪ If the creditor has evidence the consumer received the disclosure before the 3rd business day via email
or electronic means, the creditor can use that evidence to prove the actual date of delivery. Disclosures
sent and received on the due date under the ESIGN rule are considered to be delivered and received
the same day.
Revising a Loan Estimate after a Closing Disclosure Already Has Been Provided
▪
The creditor may not provide a revised Loan Estimate on or after the date it provides the Closing
Disclosure.
▪
The creditor must ensure that the consumer receives the revised Loan Estimate no later than four
business days prior to consummation.
If the creditor is mailing the revised Loan Estimate and relying upon the three (3) business day mailbox rule,
the creditor would need to place the Loan Estimate in the mail no later than seven business days before
consummation of the transaction to allow three (3) business days for receipt.
Revised Loan Estimate after Closing
▪ The creditor may not provide a revised Loan Estimate after closing.
▪ The revised Loan Estimate must be provided before the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure.
12
Closing Disclosure
12 CFR 1026.38, 1026.19(f)
▪ For loans that require a Loan Estimate (LE) and that proceed to closing, creditors must provide a new final
disclosure reflecting the actual terms of the transaction called the Closing Disclosure.
▪ The Closing Disclosure (CD) combines the RESPA HUD1 settlement statement and the TILA final TILA disclosure.
▪ The Closing Disclosure must be provided to the consumer no later than three (3) business days before
consummation.
▪ This means the consumer must receive a revised Loan Estimate no later than four business days prior to
consummation because the LE must be provided prior to the CD.
▪ The consumer may also request a copy of the CD one business day prior to consummation.
▪ When a consumer signs the CD, they are acknowledging that they have received the disclosure; however, they
are not committed to the terms.
▪ Consummation is the point the consumer becomes obligated for the loan. This generally occurs when the
borrower signs the promissory note.
Changes before Consummation that Require a New Three-day Waiting Period
If the creditor provides a corrected Closing Disclosure, it may also be required to provide the consumer with an additional
three-business-day waiting period prior to consummation. There are three triggers for this additional waiting period. (§
12 CFR 1026.19(f)(2))
▪ The disclosed APR becomes inaccurate. If the annual percentage rate (APR) previously disclosed becomes
inaccurate, the creditor must provide a corrected Closing Disclosure with the corrected APR disclosure and all
other terms that have changed. If the APR increases by a 1/8th or more, an additional three day waiting period is
required. The APR’s accuracy is determined according to § 12 CFR 1026.22. (§ 12 CFR 1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(A))
▪ The loan product changes. If the loan product previously disclosed becomes inaccurate, the creditor must
provide a corrected Closing Disclosure with the corrected loan product and all other terms that have changed. (§
12 CFR 1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(B))
▪ This period may be waived if the consumer is facing a bona fide personal financial emergency. (§ 12 CFR
1026.19(f)(1)(iv))
▪ A prepayment penalty is added. If a prepayment penalty is added to the transaction, the creditor must provide a
corrected Closing Disclosure with the prepayment penalty provision disclosed and all other terms that have
changed. (§ 12 CFR 1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(C))
For all other changes, there is no additional three-business-day waiting period required. The creditor must ensure that
the consumer receives the revised Closing Disclosure at or before consummation.
13
Corrected Disclosures After Consummation
Creditors must provide a corrected Closing Disclosure, if an event in connection with the settlement occurs during the 30-
calendar-day period after consummation that causes the Closing Disclosure to become inaccurate and results in a change
to an amount paid by the consumer from what was previously disclosed. (§ 12 CFR 1026.19(f)(2)(iii); Comment
19(f)(2)(iii)-1)
When a post-consummation event requires a corrected Closing Disclosure, the creditor must deliver or mail a corrected
Closing Disclosure not later than 30 calendar days after receiving information sufficient to establish that such an event
has occurred. (§ 12 CFR 1026.19(f)(2)(iii); Comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1)
Corrected Closing Disclosure-Refunds & Tolerance Cure
If the creditor cures a tolerance violation by providing a refund to the consumer, the creditor must deliver or place in the
mail a corrected Closing Disclosure that reflects the refund no later than 60 calendar days after consummation.
Timeshare Interests
Loans secured by interests in timeshare plans are still subject to the TILA-RESPA rule, but the Bureau recognizes that
these loans may commonly be consummated within a few days of the consumer’s application. The Bureau has adopted
abbreviated timing, delivery, and disclosure obligations for these loans when consummation occurs within three business
days of the application. For these loans, creditors may forego a Loan Estimate and provide only the Closing Disclosure. (§
12 CFR 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(C)) and (f)(1)(ii)(B); Comment 19(e)(1)(iii)-4 and Comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3)
14
TRID Overview
The waiting periods and timing requirements applicable to most loans subject to the TILA-RESPA Rule are inapplicable to
loans secured by timeshare interests. Rather, creditors are required to ensure only that the consumer receives the
Closing Disclosure no later than consummation. (§ 12 CFR 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(B))
15
