Fannie Mae Underwriting Guidelines
Debt Obligations List
What follows is an abbreviated list of what is, and is not, considered as a debt obligation.
Be sure to check out the source of this information and save it to your Favorites. You may visit using this link.
Utlities, Cell Phone
NO, not considered a debt obligation.
Monthly utilities and cell phone bills are not included in debt calculation. They are exempt from DTI ratios.
Alilmony, Child Support, Separate Maintenance Payments
YES, considered debt obligation.
When the borrower is legally required for more than 10 months to pay alimony, child support, or maintenance payments.
Note: voluntary payments do not need to be taken into consideration.
Business Debt in Borrower’s Name
NO, not considered debt obligation (when confirmed).
A self-employed borrower may claim a monthly obligation (that appears on their personal credit report) is being paid by the borrower’s
business.
In this instance, you must confirm it was paid by company funds (12 months cancelled checks) and that this was considered in its cash flow
analysis of the borrower’s business.
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 121421 1 | P age
Debt Paid by Others
NO, not considered debt obligation (when confirmed).
A borrower may not be obligated on a non-mortgage debt (i.e., installment, revolving, lease payments, alimony, child support, and separate
maintenance) if they’re not the person repaying the debt.
To confirm, you must obtain the most recent 12 months cancelled checks (or bank statements) from the other party. These must show a
12-month satisfactory payment history with no delinquent payments or it will be counted as debt.
Deferred Installment Debt
YES, considered debt obligation.
Deferred installment debts (i.e., borrower doesn’t have to repay for a year or two) must be included as part of the borrower’s recurring
monthly debt obligations.
For deferred installment debts other than student loans, you should:
▪ Check credit report to see if it indicates the monthly amount that will be payable at the end of the deferment period; or
▪ Obtain copies of the borrower’s payment letters or forbearance agreements; or
▪ Use the 5% rule which means multiplying the balance by 5% and using this amount as the qualifying monthly payment.
Home Equity Lines of Credit
YES, considered debt obligation.
When the mortgage that will be delivered to Fannie Mae also has a home equity line of credit (HELOC) that provides for a monthly payment
of principal and interest, or interest only, the payment on the HELOC must be considered as part of the borrower’s recurring monthly debt
obligations.
Garnishments
YES, considered debt obligation.
All garnishments with more than ten months remaining must be included in the borrower’s recurring monthly debt obligations for qualifying
purposes.
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 121421 2 | P age
Installment Debt
YES, considered debt obligation.
All installment debt that is not secured by a financial asset (i.e., student loans, automobile loans, and home equity loans) must be
considered part of the borrower’s recurring monthly debt obligations if there are more than ten monthly payments remaining.
However, an installment debt with fewer monthly payments remaining also should be considered as a recurring monthly debt obligation if it
significantly affects the borrower’s ability to meet his or her credit obligations.
Loans Secured by Financial Assets
NO, not considered debt obligation.
When a borrower uses his or her financial assets (i.e., life insurance policies, 401(k) accounts, IRAs, CDs, stocks, bonds, etc.) as security
for a loan, this is considered a contingent liability.
The lender is not required to include this contingent liability as part of the borrower’s recurring monthly debt obligations, provided the lender
obtains a copy of the loan instrument that shows the borrower’s financial asset acts as collateral for the loan.
Open 30–Day Charge Accounts
NO, not considered debt obligation.
All installment debt that is not secured by a financial asset (i.e., student loans, automobile loans, and home equity loans) must be
considered part of the borrower’s recurring monthly debt obligations if there are more than ten monthly payments remaining.
However, an installment debt with fewer monthly payments remaining also should be considered as a recurring monthly debt obligation if it
significantly affects the borrower’s ability to meet his or her credit obligations.
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 121421 3 | P age
Revolving Accounts
YES, considered debt obligation.
Revolving charge accounts and open lines of credit (i.e., credit cards, department store charge cards, etc.) are open-ended and should be
treated as long-term debts and must be considered part of the borrower's recurring monthly debt obligations.
If the credit report does not show a required minimum payment amount (and there is no supplemental documentation to support a payment
of less than 5%), the lender must use 5% of the outstanding balance as the borrower's recurring monthly debt obligation.
Student Loans
YES, considered debt obligation.
For all student loans, whether deferred, in forbearance, or in repayment (not deferred), the lender must include a monthly payment in the
borrower’s recurring monthly debt obligation when qualifying the borrower.
If the credit report does not provide a monthly payment for the student loan, or if the credit report shows $0 as the monthly payment (which
may be the case for deferred loans or loans in forbearance), the lender must calculate a qualifying monthly payment using one of the
options below:
▪ 1% of the outstanding student loan balance (even if this amount is lower than the actual fully amortizing payment), or
▪ A fully amortizing payment using the documented loan repayment terms.
Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All rights reserved | Version 121421 4 | P age
