Uniform
State Content
Upon completion of the magazine, you will be able to:
• Understand the details of the SAFE Act and the Model State Law
(MSL)
Section Introduction
In 2008, th e housing industry suffered significant declines due to an economic financial crisis. To help
mitigate the impact of these changes, Congress passed the Housing & Economic Recovery Act (HERA).
Title V of HERA is the SAFE Act. The SAFE Act was originally enforced by HUD.
With the passage of the Dodd Frank Act in July 2010 and the subsequent creation of the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), an umbrella was created to house most of the mortgage related
laws under one entity. One of these laws is the Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act
(SAFE Act) under CFPB, which is the first law this lesson will address. This will be followed by an in-depth
review of the Model State Law (MSL) created to assist states with implementing the SAFE Act on a state
level. Initially HUD was responsible for the implementation and enforcement of the SAFE Act.
1
Edition v.020419 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
The
SAFE
Act
The SAFE Act was created to provide additional protections for consumers and to
reduce fraud in residential mortgage lending. The law accomplished these
objectives by requiring the establishment of a registry to track individuals and
entities involved in loan origination. In addition, the SAFE Act mandates that states
ensure mortgage loan originators comply with the Act by instituting regulations to
implement this federal law on a state level.
To assist in this implementation, HUD recruited two industry organizations to
create a model or template for states to follow. This model is referred to as the
Model State Law (MSL). A more detailed review of the MSL will be reviewed later in
this chapter.
Two years later in 2013, the UST was created to provide an opportunity for MLOs
to complete a single test instead of a national and state specific tests for every
state where licensing was desired. States have the option of joining this UST system
which eliminates the need for testing of state specific laws. The Uniform State Test
(UST) component of the exam tests applicants on their understanding of the SAFE
Act and the MSL. Since content in the UST section of the test are universal to all
states, the national exam no longer references any state specific laws.
2
Origins of the SAFE Act
H.E.R.A
Housing & Economic
Recove ry Act
CFPB
Consumer Financial
In 2008, the 110th congress passed Protection Bureau
the Housing and Economic (Enforces SAFE Act – Reg. H)
Recovery Act, a law designed to
address the declining housing
The Dodd Frank Act, which
market. The law is comprised of
regulates financial services, was
titles and title V of HERA is the
enacted in July 2010. The law
SAFE Act.
MSL created the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau (CFPB), known
Model State Law
as the Bureau, to enforce the
provisions of the Dodd Frank Act.
Model State Law is a template One year later, enforcement of the
developed to assist states in SAFE Act SAFE Act was transferred from
adapting state laws to meet the HUD to the CFPB. The CFPB
Secure & Fair Enforcement
requirements of the SAFE Act. The for Mortgage Licensing Act subsequently recoded the SAFE
Conference of State Bank (Title V of HERA Act as Regulation H.
Supervisors and the American
Association of Residential
The SAFE Act is the “Secure and
Mortgage Regulators, both non-
Fair Enforcement for Mortgage
government entities, establish the
Licensing Act” and mandates that
standards of the banking industry
there be a registry that tracks
(CSBS) and the residential lending
mortgage loan originators doing
industries (AARMR). These two
business within the United States.
entities created the MSL and also
It also requires states to adapt
created and maintain the NMLS.
laws to meet the conditions of the
Act. The SAFE Act was originally
enforced by HUD.
NMLS
Nationwide Mortgage
Licensing System
The Nationwide Mortgage
Licensing System and Registry
tracks mortgage loan originators.
Figure 7: Origins of the SAFE Act Graphic
3
Terms that are Defined in the SAFE Act
American Association of Residential The national association of executives and employees of the various states
Mortgage Regulators (AARMR) who are charged with the responsibility for administration and regulation of
(industry organization, not residential mortgage lending, servicing, and brokering, and dedicated to the
government) goals described at www.aarmr.org.
Along with CSBS created the Model State Law and the NMLS&R.
Bureau The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
Conference of State Bank Supervisors
(CSBS) Dedicated to maintaining the state banking system and state regulation of
financial services in accordance with the CSBS statement of principles
(industry organization not government) described at www.csbs.org. Along with AARMR created the Model State Law
and the NMLS&R.
Employee An individual:
(1) Whose work performance is subject to control of, or controlled by a
person.
(2) Whose compensation for Federal income tax purposes is reported on a
W-2 form issued by the controlling person.
Loan processor or underwriter An individual who supports origination of residential mortgage loans by
performing clerical or support duties at the direction of and subject to the
(Employee exempt from licensing) supervision and instruction of:
(1) A state-licensed loan originator
(2) A registered loan originator
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System The mortgage licensing system developed and maintained by the Conference
and Registry (NMLSR) of State Bank Supervisors and the American Association of Residential
Mortgage Regulators for the licensing and registration of loan originators and
the registration of registered loan originators or any system established by
the Director.
Nontraditional mortgage product Any mortgage product other than a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage.
Origination of a residential mortgage All residential mortgage loan-related activities from the taking of a residential
loan, for purposes of the definition of mortgage loan application through the completion of all required loan closing
loan processor or underwriter documents and funding of the residential mortgage loan.
Real estate brokerage activities Any activity that involves offering or providing real estate brokerage services
to the public.
Residential mortgage loan Any loan primarily for personal, family, or household use that is secured by a
mortgage, deed of trust, or other equivalent consensual security interest on a
dwelling (as defined by TILA) or residential real estate upon which is
constructed or intended to be constructed a dwelling.
Unique identifier A number or other identifier that:
(1) Permanently identifies a loan originator.
(2) Is assigned by protocols established by the Nationwide Mortgage
Licensing System and Registry and the Bureau to facilitate electronic
tracking of loan originators and uniform identification of, and public
access to, the employment history of and the publicly adjudicated
disciplinary and enforcement actions against loan originators.
(3) Is used only for purposes outlined by the S.A.F.E. Act.
4
Individuals Required to be Licensed
§ 12 CFR 1008.103
A state operating a SAFE compliant program will not allow an individual to engage in residential loan
origination activities unless the individual first:
1. Registers as a loan originator through, and obtains a unique identifier from, the NMLSR
2. Obtains and maintains a valid loan originator license from a state
When is a person considered a MLO?
An MLO is any individual who:
1. Takes a residential mortgage loan application
2. Offers or negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan for compensation or gain
3. Represents to the public through advertising of an ability to originate loans
When is a residential mortgage loan application considered to have been taken?
An individual is considered to have taken a residential mortgage loan application if the individual:
▪ Receives a residential mortgage loan application
▪ Accepts the terms offered by a borrower or prospective borrower, directly or indirectly, in response to a
solicitation to extend an offer of residential mortgage loan terms
▪ Offers or negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan for compensation or gain (to a borrower or
prospective borrower)
What are the guidelines for independent contractor processors/underwriters?
▪ Registers as a loan originator through and obtains a unique identifier from the NMLSR
a. Obtains and maintains a valid loan originator license from a state
Which individuals are not required to be licensed as MLOs under Reg H?
(a) A state licensed or registered individual who performs only real estate brokerage activities.
(b) An individual involved only in extending credit relating to timeshare plans.
(c) An individual who performs only clerical or support duties and:
o Works and/or is supervised by a state licensed or registered mortgage loan originator OR is
licensed and registered an independent contractor.
o Who performs duties relating to transactions that do not require a licensed loan originator.
(d) An individual who is an employee of a depository institution registered with, and maintains a unique
identifier through, the NMLS&R.
(e) An employee of a bona fide nonprofit organization who acts as a loan originator with respect to
residential mortgage loans. (A non-profit must have a 501(c)(3) election and be in the affordable
housing or housing education business).
(f) Any individual who offers or negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan with, or on behalf of, an
immediate family member of the individual.
(g) Any individual who offers or negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan secured by a dwelling that
served as the individual’s residence.
(h) A licensed attorney who negotiates the terms of a residential mortgage loan on behalf of a client as a
secondary matter to the attorney’s representation of the client and does not receive compensation
from the mortgage lender, broker or mortgage loan originator.
5
How does License Revocation and Criminal History Impact MLO Licensing Status?
To be eligible for a loan originator license, a state must require and find, at a minimum, that an individual:
a. Has never had a loan originator license revoked in any governmental jurisdiction, unless a formally
vacated revocation.
b. Has never been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, a felony in a domestic, foreign, or
military court:
i. During the 7-year period prior to application date for licensing.
ii. At any time prior to the application date, if a felony involved an act of fraud, dishonesty, a
breach of trust, or money laundering.
Relating to (b) above:
i. Expunged convictions and pardoned convictions do not affect the eligibility of the individual.
ii. Whether a particular crime is classified as a felony is determined by the law of the jurisdiction
in which an individual is convicted.
6
Education and Testing Requirements
Pre-Licensing and Re-Licensing Education of Loan Originators
MSL.070
Issuance of License
Applicants for a loan originator’s license must complete at least 20 hours of pre-licensing education by an
NMLS approved course provider that has been reviewed and approved by the NMLS&R. The pre-licensing
education completed by the individual must include at least:
8 hours core requirements plus 12 hours of electives
▪ 3 hours of Federal law and regulations.
▪ 3 hours of ethics, which must include instruction on fraud, consumer protection, and fair lending issues.
▪ 2 hours of training on lending standards for the nontraditional mortgage product marketplace.
▪ 12 hours of electives.
VENUE OF EDUCATION — Pre-licensing education may be offered either in a classroom, online, or by any other
means approved by the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry.
RECIPROCITY OF EDUCATION — The pre-licensing education requirements approved by the Nationwide
Mortgage Licensing System and Registry for any state must be accepted as credit towards completion of pre-
licensing education requirements in any state.
What are the testing and re-testing standards?
▪ Achieve a test score of 75% on a written test developed by the NMLSR.
▪ An individual may take a test three consecutive times. Each retest cannot occur less than 30 days after
the preceding test.
▪ If an individual fails three consecutive tests, then the individual must wait at least 6 months before
taking the test again.
Under what conditions must a formerly state licensed loan originator retake the test?
If a loan originator who was formerly licensed fails to maintain a valid license for 5 years or longer, then the
individual must retake the test and achieve a test score of 75% . This does not consider any time the individual
was a registered loan originator (bank or credit union).
7
To be eligible for a loan originator license renewal, a state must require the individual to:
(a) Continue to meet the minimum standards for a license.
(b) Satisfy annual continuing education requirements, which must include at least 8 hours of education
approved by the NMLSR. The 8 hours of annual continuing education must include at least:
▪ 7 hours core plus 1 hour elective
o 3 hours of Federal law and regulations.
o 2 hours of ethics, including instruction on fraud, consumer protection, and fair lending
issues.
o 2 hours of training related to lending standards for the nontraditional mortgage product
marketplace.
o 1 hour elective.
A state-licensed loan originator may:
▪ Only receive credit for a continuing education course in the year in which the course is taken.
▪ Not take an approved course more than one time in the same year or in consecutive years.
An instructor will receive 2 hours of credit for every hour of credit taught.
LAPSE IN LICENSE – Continuing Education Requirement
A licensed mortgage loan originator who subsequently becomes unlicensed must complete the continuing
education requirements for the last year in which the license was held prior to issuance of a new or renewed
license.
License renewal window – The window for license renewal is November 1 to December 31.
License Expiration – The license of a mortgage loan originator failing to satisfy the minimum standards for license
renewal will expire on December 31st. The Commissioner may adopt procedures for the reinstatement of expired licenses
consistent with the standards established by the NMLS&R.
The Bureau’s Authority to Examine Loan Originator Records § 12 CFR 1008.401
The CFPB may:
▪ Examine any books, papers, records, or other data of any loan originator operating in any state which is
subject to a licensing system established by the Bureau.
▪ Issue a summons for any loan originator or any person having possession of records to appear before
the bureau.
8
Model State Law &
the Uniform
State Test
2
n
o
i
t
c
e
S
1
Edition v.020419 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Model State Law
State Model Language for Implementation of Public Law 110-289, Title V—S.A.F.E. Mortgage
Licensing Act
During the transition of incorporating the S.A.F.E. Act, several state legislatures did not have previous mortgage
loan originator standards included in their legislative code. The Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) and
the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR) were recruited by HUD to develop a
State model to be incorporated into a state legislative code, thus simplifying, and to a large degree
standardizing, the incorporation of the S.A.F.E. Act into state law.
State License and Registration Application and Issuance MSL.050
What items must an applicant for MLO licensure provide to NMLS regarding their identity?
BACKGROUND CHECKS—In connection with an application for licensing as a mortgage loan originator, an
applicant must, at a minimum, supply to NMLS information regarding the applicant’s identity, including—
(a) Fingerprints for submission to the FBI and any governmental agency or entity authorized to receive such
information for a state, national, and international criminal history background check.
(b) Personal history and experience, including the submission of authorization for the NMLS&R and the
Commissioner to obtain:
i. An independent credit report obtained from a consumer reporting agency.
ii. Information related to any administrative, civil, or criminal findings by any governmental
jurisdiction.
When assessing an applicant’s character and general fitness, what are the 4 primary areas of focus?
MSL.060 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
CHARACTER AND FITNESS—The applicant must demonstrate financial responsibility, character, and general
fitness, such as to command the confidence of the community and to warrant a determination that the
mortgage loan originator will operate honestly, fairly, and efficiently within the purposes of this Act.
A person who demonstrates they are not financially responsible when they have shown a disregard in the
management of their own financial condition. A determination that an individual has not shown financial
responsibility may include, but not limited to:
▪ Current outstanding judgments, except judgments solely as a result of medical expense.
▪ Current outstanding tax liens or other government liens and filing.
▪ Foreclosures within the past three years.
▪ A pattern of seriously delinquent accounts within the past three years.
2
Authority to Require License (Commissioner)
For purposes of the Model State Law, the head of the regulatory agency for residential mortgage licensing
purposes in any state is referred to as the Commissioner. In addition to any other duties imposed upon the
Commissioner by law, the Commissioner will require mortgage loan originators to be registered and/or
licensed through the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System.
The Commissioner may establish requirements as necessary, including, but not limited to:
1. BACKGROUND CHECKS—Background checks for:
(a) Criminal history through fingerprint or other databases
(b) Civil or administrative records
(c) Credit history
(d) Any other information as deemed necessary by the NMLS&R
2. FEES—The payment of fees to apply for, or renew, licenses through the NMLS&R.
3. SETTING DATES—The setting or resetting as necessary of renewal or reporting dates.
4. OTHER—Requirements for amending or surrendering a license or any other such activities as the
Commissioner deems necessary for participation in the NMLS&R.
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry Information Challenge
Process
The Commissioner will establish a process whereby mortgage loan originators may challenge information
entered into the NMLS&R by the Commissioner.
3
Enforcement Authorities,
Violations, & Penalties
What are enforcement duties and responsibilities of the Commissioner in each state?
1. To ensure there is effective supervision and enforcement of this Act, the Commissioner may:
(a) Deny, suspend, revoke, condition, or decline to renew a license for a violation of this Act.
(b) Deny, suspend, revoke, condition, or decline to renew a license if an applicant or licensee fails at
any time to meet the requirements relating to the issuance of a license or standards for license
renewal. Or withholds information or makes a material misstatement in an application for a
license or renewal of a license.
(c) Order restitution against persons subject to this Act for violations of this Act.
(d) Impose fines.
(e) Issue orders or directives as follows:
i. Order or direct persons to cease and desist from conducting business, including
immediate temporary orders to cease and desist.
ii. Order or direct persons to cease any harmful activities or violations of this Act, including
immediate temporary orders to cease and desist.
iii. Enter immediate temporary orders to cease business under a license or interim license
issued if the Commissioner determines that such license was erroneously granted or the
licensee is currently in violation of this Act.
iv. Order or direct such other affirmative action as the Commissioner deems necessary.
What is the maximum civil penalty amount a Commissioner can assess?
1. The Commissioner may impose a civil penalty on a mortgage loan originator or person if the
Commissioner finds, on the record after notice and opportunity for hearing, that a mortgage loan
originator or person subject to this Act has violated or failed to comply with any requirement of this Act
or regulations established by the Commissioner.
2. The maximum amount of penalty for each act or omission will be $34,401 (2023).
3. Each violation or failure to comply with any directive or order of the Commissioner is a separate and
distinct violation or failure.
4
Surety Bond, Net Worth, & Recovery Options
What are the requirements for surety bond, net worth, or recovery fund options?
Each state will choose to implement a requirement for surety bond, net worth, or recovery fund option to
protect citizens of the state who have a successful claim against a mortgage loan originator for violation of
state law, including acts of fraud. Below is an overview of the features of each option.
Surety Bond Option
1. COVERAGE, FORM, AND REGULATIONS — Each mortgage loan originator must be covered by a surety
bond.
In the event that the mortgage loan originator is an employee or exclusive agent of a person subject to
this Act, the surety bond of the person subject to this Act can be used instead of the mortgage loan
originator’s surety bond requirement.
(a) The surety bond must provide coverage for each mortgage loan originator.
(b) The surety bond must be in a form determined by the Commissioner.
(c) The Commissioner may establish rules with respect to the requirements for surety bonds.
2. PENAL SUM OF SURETY BOND — The penal sum of the surety bond must be maintained in an amount
that reflects the dollar amount of loans originated as determined by the Commissioner.
3. ACTION ON BOND — When an action is commenced on a licensee’s bond, the Commissioner may
require the filing of a new bond.
4. NEW BOND — Immediately upon a recovery any action on the bond, the licensee must file a new bond.
Net Worth Option
MINIMUM NET WORTH REQUIRED
1. MINIMUM NET WORTH— A minimum net worth must be maintained continuously for mortgage loan
originators. In the event a mortgage loan originator is an employee or exclusive agent of a person
subject to this Act, the net worth of the person can be used instead of the mortgage loan originator’s
minimum net worth requirement.
(a) Minimum net worth must be maintained in an amount that reflects the dollar amount of loans
originated as determined by the Commissioner.
(b) The Commissioner may require for minimum net worth as are necessary to accomplish the
purposes of this Act.
Recovery Fund Option
Some States have a recovery fund program where mortgage professionals contribute. When there is a
successful consumer claim, funds to settle the claim are taken from the fund.
STATE RECOVERY FUND - Each state choosing the recovery fund option will draft unique language establishing a
fund.
Public Access to Information
Employment history and publicly decided disciplinary and enforcement actions against mortgage loan
originators included in the NMLS&R for access by the public are not subject to this section.
5
Model State Law &
Uniform
the Uniform
SSttaatet Tee sCt ontent
3
n
o
i
t
c
e
S
1
Edition v. 080220 | Ameritrain Mortgage Institute | All Rights Reserved
Prohibited Acts and Practices
What are prohibited acts and practices under this regulation?
It is a violation of this Act for a person or individual subject to this Act to:
(1) Directly or indirectly employ any scheme, device, or artifice to defraud or mislead.
(2) Engage in any unfair or deceptive practice toward any person.
(3) Obtain property by fraud or misrepresentation.
(4) Solicit or enter into a contract with a borrower that provides in substance that the person or
individual subject to this Act may earn a fee or commission through “best efforts” to obtain a loan even
though no loan is actually obtained for the borrower.
(5) Solicit, advertise, or enter into a contract for specific interest rates, points, or other financing
terms unless the terms are actually available at the time of soliciting, advertising, or contracting.
(6) Conduct any business covered by this Act without holding a valid license as required under this
Act or assist or aid and abet any person in the conduct of business under this Act without a valid license
as required under this Act.
(7) Fail to make disclosures as required by this Act and any other applicable state or federal law.
(8) Fail to comply with this Act or fail to comply with any other state or federal law, including the rules
and regulations applicable to any business authorized or conducted under this Act.
(9) Make, in any manner, any false or deceptive statement or representation including, with regard
to the rates, points, or other financing terms or conditions for a residential mortgage loan, or engage in
bait and switch advertising.
(10) Negligently make any false statement or knowingly and willfully make any omission of material
fact in connection with any information or reports filed with a governmental agency or the NMLS&R or in
connection with any investigation conducted by the Commissioner or another governmental agency.
(11) Make any payment, threat, or promise, directly or indirectly, to:
▪ any person for the purposes of influencing the independent judgment of the person in connection
with a residential mortgage loan.
▪ any appraiser of a property, for the purposes of influencing the independent judgment of the
appraiser with respect to the value of the property.
(12) Collect, charge, attempt to collect, or charge, use, or propose any agreement purporting to collect
or charge any fee prohibited by this Act.
(13) Cause or require a borrower to obtain property insurance coverage in an amount that exceeds
the replacement cost of the improvements as established by the property insurer.
(14) Fail to truthfully account for monies belonging to a party to a residential mortgage loan
transaction.
2
Uniform State Test (UST)
Overview
On April 1, 2013, NMLS launched the Uniform State Test or UST. This was the first major change to SAFE MLO Test
requirements since the SAFE MLO tests were launched in July, 2009. The UST is a domain or section of the National Test
Component. The UST material tests applicants on their knowledge of high level state-related content based on the SAFE
Act and the CSBS/AARMR Model State Law (MSL) used by many states to implement the SAFE Act.
The UST replaces the state-specific test components for the states that adopt it. Therefore, by passing the National
exam with the Uniform State Content a candidate satisfies the testing requirements for licensure in those adopting states.
Test Component Comparison Chart
Test Name # of Questions Test Length Appointment Length Test Fees
National Test 120 total 190 minutes 225 minutes $110
Component with 115 scored
UST
Table 14: Test Component Comparison Chart
3
Temporary Authority
The Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (S. 2155 or the amendments), signed into law on
May 24, 2018, adds a new section to the federal SAFE Act entitled “Employment Transition of Loan Originators”. These
amendments became effective November 24, 2019, 18 months after enactment.
For registered MLO becoming employed by a State-licensed mortgage company seeking temporary authority to
originate loans, they must conform to the following:
▪ Has submitted an application to become a state licensed MLO in the application state
▪ Must have been continuously employed by a federal chartered institution (ex. bank) for one year
For state licensed mortgage loan originator seeking temporary authority to originate loans in another state,
they must conform to the following:
▪ Has submitted an application to become a state licensed MLO in the application state
▪ Must have been continuously employed by a state licensed mortgage company for the past 30 days
The following are applicable to both registered and state licensed MLOs seeking temporary authority:
▪ Paid on a W2 basis
▪ Never had an application for MLO license denied
▪ Never had an MLO license revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction
▪ Never been the subject of a cease and desist order
▪ Has not been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony that would preclude licensure in the application
state
1. fingerprints for submission to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and any governmental agency
or entity authorized to receive such information for a State and national criminal history
background check; and
2. personal history and experience, (MU4 form) including authorization for the System to obtain an
independent credit report obtained from a consumer reporting agency described; and
3. information related to any administrative, civil or criminal findings by any governmental
jurisdiction
An application is considered received when the individual submits the required information above and
completed the NMLS and application education and or testing requirements for licensure within 120 days.
4
What loans does the rule cover? (CFR 12 1026.36(b))
Almost all closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling, including any real property attached
to the dwelling, are subject to the provisions on compensation, qualification, identification, and the
establishment and maintenance of written policies and procedures for compliance.
▪ This includes loans made to consumers that are secured by residential structures that contain one to four
units, including condominiums and cooperatives. It is not limited to first liens or to loans on primary
residences.
▪ The provisions on compensation, qualification, identification, and the establishment and maintenance of
written policies and procedures do not apply to:
▪ Open-end credit plans, including HELOCs.
▪ Time-share plans.
▪ The prohibitions on mandatory arbitration clauses, waivers of federal claims, and certain financing
practices for credit insurance apply to:
o closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling, except certain time-share plans,
and to HELOCs secured by a consumer’s principal dwelling.
What determines an individual is a loan originator? (12 CFR 1026.36(a)(1))
A “loan originator” can be either a “loan originator organization” or an “individual loan originator.”
5
What actions determine if an individual is a loan originator?
An entity may be a “loan originator,” if the entity is an organization or individual that for compensation or other
monetary gain performs loan origination activities, such as:
▪ Taking an application.
▪ Arranging a credit transaction.
▪ Assisting a consumer in applying for credit. A loan originator assists a consumer in obtaining or applying
for credit by advising on particular credit terms that are, or may be, available to the consumer based on
the consumer’s financial profile.
▪ Offering or negotiating credit terms. Credit terms include rates, fees, and other costs. Credit terms are
selected based on the consumer’s financial characteristics when those terms are selected based on any
factors that may influence a credit decision, such as debts, income, assets, or credit history.
▪ Making an extension of credit.
▪ Referring a consumer to a loan originator or creditor. Referring is an activity included under each of the
activities of offering, arranging, or assisting a consumer in obtaining or applying to obtain an extension of
credit.
▪ Advertising or communicating to the public that you can, or will, perform any loan origination services.
Tip: This definition of “loan originator” is broader than the one under
the SAFE Act and its regulations designed to implement the Act.
Tip: If you are a servicer or work for a servicer, you become a
loan originator if you perform loan origination activities on a
covered transaction, such as handling a refinancing transaction or
assisting in, or adding, a different consumer on an existing debt.
Im plementa tion
However, renegotiating or modifying an existing mortgage does not constitute a loan
origination activity. You will find the criteria for determining whether a loan is defined as
modification or a refinance in Regulation Z at § 12 CFR 1026.20(a).
6
An individual is not a loan originator solely based on the performance of the following activities:
▪ Provide bona fide, third-party advisory services, such as those an accountant, attorney, or registered
financial advisor would do. However, if a MLO advises a consumer on credit terms offered by either the
MLO or their employer, or if the MLO receives, or expects to receive, compensation from loan originators
or creditors for providing advice on credit terms offered by them, or for referring consumers to them,
then the individual is a loan originator.
▪ Provide HUD-approved housing counseling services in certain circumstances.
▪ Provide general explanations, information, or descriptions of credit products in response to consumer
queries.
▪ Describe other product-related services. For example, optional monthly payment methods via telephone
or via automatic account withdrawals, the availability and features of online account access, the
availability of 24-hour customer support, or free mobile applications to access account information.
▪ As an employee of a creditor or loan originator, provide contact information of a loan originator or
creditor for whom you work, or for another person who works for that entity with the exception that the
information does not discuss particular credit terms with the consumer that would cause a borrower to
make a decision based on the consumer’s financial characteristics, or direct the consumer to a particular
loan originator or creditor seeking to originate credit transactions to consumers with the consumer’s
financial characteristics based on the employee’s assessment of those characteristics.
▪ Perform loan-processing activities, such as compiling and assembling credit application packages and
supporting documentation, for a loan originator or creditor. Implementation.
▪ Persons who coordinate consummation of the credit transaction or other aspects of the credit transaction
process, such as communicating with a consumer about process deadlines and documents needed at
consummation, are not loan originators, provided that any communication that includes a discussion
about credit terms available from a creditor to that consumer were previously selected and were based
on the consumer’s financial characteristics which only confirm credit terms already agreed to by the
consumer.
▪ Perform credit underwriting activities, so long as you do not communicate directly with the consumer
about specific credit terms.
What counts as compensation? (12 CFR 1026.36(a)(3))
For a loan originator, the term “compensation” generally includes salaries, commissions, and any financial or
similar incentive that a MLO can receive and retain.
For example, the term “compensation” includes:
▪ An annual or other periodic bonus
▪ Awards of merchandise, services, trips, or similar prizes (Comment 36(a)-5.i)
7
Does the name of the fee matter?
Loan originator compensation generally includes retained payments and is not dependent on the label or name
given to a fee.
How does the prohibition against compensation based on a transaction term work? (§ 12 CFR 1026.36(d)(1))
The existing compensation provisions in Regulation Z, and codified by the Dodd-Frank Act, were designed to
eliminate some of the most common incentives that loan originators had historically used to steer consumers
into loans that are less advantageous than those for which the consumers otherwise qualified. The existing rule
prohibits loan origination compensation based on transaction terms, such as interest rate, or a proxy for
transaction terms.
The Loan Originator Rule clarifies this existing prohibition, including defining what constitutes a transaction term,
clarifying how to determine whether a factor is a proxy for a transaction term, and clarifying when compensation
may be paid based on profits from a mortgage-related business.
Not Compensable Items
For purposes of the compensation provisions, a loan originator generally may not receive compensation that is
based on:
▪ A term of a single transaction.
▪ The terms of multiple transactions conducted by the MLO.
▪ The terms of multiple transactions conducted by multiple loan originators, taken in the aggregate, such
as most profits-based compensation plans.
▪ The rule also prohibits anyone for purposes of the compensation provisions from paying loan originators
compensation that is based on transaction terms. This means creditors, loan originators, or anyone else
may not pay their own loan originator employees or other loan originators, such as brokers,
compensation based on the term of a transaction or multiple transactions.
Examples of prohibited compensation include, but are not limited to:
▪ A loan originator receiving higher compensation based on the transaction’s interest rate, such as receiving
2% of the loan amount if the interest rate is above 6% and 1% of the loan amount if the interest rate is
6% or less.
▪ A loan originator receiving higher compensation based on whether the loan contract contains a
prepayment penalty.
▪ A loan originator receiving higher compensation for closing more than 10 transactions per month with an
interest rate higher than 6%.
▪ An individual loan originator receiving additional compensation if the consumer buys creditor required
title insurance from the originator’s employer or its affiliate, rather than a third party.
8
What is a transaction term? (§ 12 CFR 1026.36(d)(1)(ii))
A transaction “term” is any right or obligation of the parties to a credit transaction, except for the amount of
credit extended. “Credit transaction” means the “operative acts” and written and oral agreements that,
together, create the consumer’s right to defer payment of debt or to incur debt and defer its payment.
An example of an “operative act” in a covered credit transaction is the consumer’s purchase of certain goods and
services essential to the transaction, such as required title insurance or a required appraisal.
Terms of the transaction include:
▪ Rights and obligations in the note or other credit contract and in the security instrument, and any
document incorporated by reference.
▪ Any fees or charges required to be disclosed in the Good Faith Estimate, the HUD-1, or HUD-1A that are:
Imposed by the loan originator or creditor on the consumer for the credit or for any credit-related product
or service provided by the loan originator or creditor.
▪ For any product or service required as a condition of the extension of credit, such as title insurance
protecting the creditor’s interest, or an appraisal.
Examples of transaction terms include:
▪ The interest rate.
▪ The annual percentage rate.
▪ The collateral type (e.g., condominium, cooperative, detached home, or manufactured housing).
▪ The existence of a prepayment penalty.
▪ The origination points or fees paid to the creditor or loan originator.
▪ Fees for creditor-required title insurance.
▪ Varying compensation to a loan originator based on the “product type” often will violate the rule, because
many “products” (which is not a defined term) in the market refer to different bundles of specific
transaction terms.
Is the amount of credit extended a transaction term? (§ 12 CFR 1026.36(d)(1)(ii))
The amount of credit extended is not a transaction term, if the loan originator compensation is based on a fixed
percentage of the amount of credit extended. Such compensation may be subject to a minimum or maximum
dollar amount, provided the amounts do not vary with each transaction.
Examples:
▪ A creditor is permitted to compensate a loan originator 1% of the amount of credit extended for all loans
the originator arranges for the creditor but not less than $1,000 or greater than $5,000 for each loan.
▪ A creditor is not permitted to compensate a loan originator 1% of the amount of credit extended for
loans of $300,000 or more, 2% of the amount of credit extended for loans of more than $200,000 and less
than $300,000, and 3% of the amount of credit for loans of $200,000 or less.
9
